Proposed
Research Program
on
Mechanisms of Phosgene Injury to the Lungs
EXHIBIT A
Purpose
The purpose of this program, to be collectively funded by voluntary sub­
scriptions from interested companies, is to provide information on the basic
mechanisms Involved in phosgene damage to the lungs. This information is a
prerequisite for the determination of a reconmended method of medical treat­
ment of industrial exposures to phosgene.
Initial Project
As recommended by the Ad Hoc Task Group on Phosgene Safety composed of
representatives of interested member companies, the lnaediate project is that
defined in the proposal made by Or. M. F, Frosolono of the.Mt. Sinai Hospital
of Cleveland in a letter to MCA dated August 23, 1972. This project Is to be
conducted under contracts (a) between MCA and Mt. Sinai Hospital of Cleveland,
not to exceed $30,000 and (b) between MCA and Dr. Frosolono for consulting fees
regarding the research referred to in (a), not to exceed $3,000.
Supervision
This research is to be supervised on MCA's behalf by a Technical Task Group
composed of one technical representative from each subscribing company plus an
MCA staff representative to serve as secretary.
Organizationally within MCA, the Task Group is to function under the Juris­
diction of the Safety and Fire Protection Comnittee.
Funding
Consnitments have been made by thirteen interested companies in support of
this research, up to $3,500 per company. Funds are to be collected in advance
of commitments, and disbursements subject to MCA staff clearance and approval.
Stipulations
The scientific information developed from this program is to be fully dis­
closed without restriction. For purposes of consistency and control, however,
all releases are to be made through MCA only, normally based on Task Force recom­
mendations as to nature and timing. This requirement is not to preclude pri­
vate scientific Interchange of non'competitive information which will be useful,
nor relevant private cosnunlcation among subscribing companies and organizations;
the staff representative to be informed of all such interchanges and communications.
Operation
The Task Group will be governed by MCA's "General Principles Applicable to
the Structure and Operations of Conmittees" and the Rules of Organization and
Procedure of the Safety and Fire Protection Committee.
MCA
CMA 036207
EXHIBIT D
Report of
Education Activities Committee
to
Manufacturing Chemists Association
November 20, 1972
By Henry W. Rahn, Chairman
It is three years since the EAC Committee last reported directly to this Board.
In the interim, several significant developments have occurred affecting the area
wherein the Committee functions - namely, the industrial-academic interface. These
include: first - employment opportunities for new technical graduates in the chemical
industry shrank to low levels; seeond - a wave of technical staff reductions by job
termination ran through the industry in 1970 and 1971; and third - society's attitude
toward our industry underwent deterioration to where we now labor under the burden of
a negative public image. It is most appropriate, therefore, and I welcome this op­
portunity to review for you the Committee's objectives, plans and activities, structured
to meet our assignment and responsibility to the MCA under conditions so changed from
the past.
COMMITTEE EVOLUTION
The Committee was first established in the mid 50's when, as you will recall, there
was a shortage of graduate chemists. The initial objective was to encourage students
i pursue a career in chemistry, so as to assure an adequate supply of chemists for the
xpanding needs of our industry.
Until the mid 60's, the Committee continued to follow a program of recruiting students
into chemistry. But then some red flags went up, when careful reviews of technical
graduate supply-demand studies lad several of our members to predict that the high post
World War II birth rates would result in an oversupply of chemists in the early 70's. The
rough coincidence of this graduate oversupply timing, with the economic downturn of the
chemical industry beginning in 1969, and the layoffs of employed chemists and chemical
engineers which ensued, accelerated the rate at which the oversupply of unemployed
ch mically-trained persons was growing. As of earlier this year, 25% of all chemists 26
years of age or less were unemployed. Faced with these unsettling aspects in the job
market, the Committee decided to modify its objectives. Instead of stressing recruitment,
we began to focus on the quality and type of training suitable for chemists going into
industry.
CMA 036213
FUTURE TECHNICAL MANPOWER SUPPLY-DEMAND RELATIONSHIP
In looking ahead, we are confronted with a highly confused picture concerning the
future demand-supply relationship for new graduate scientific and engineering man­
power. Major long-range studies reaching into the 1980's by such prestigious groups
as the National Science Foundation, Scientific Manpower Commission, Engineering
Manpower Commission of the Joint Engineers Council and the U. S. Department of
Labor reach varying forecasts, ranging from prediction of years of oversupply to dire
warnings of impending shortages.
Perhaps this is to be expected as the nation grapples with the problem of changing
priorities and shifting activities. And in view of this, it would appear that the use of
historical trend data for predicting technical manpower supplies ten years from now forces
some degree of uncertainty into the forecasts. But the weight of the evidence seems to
lie on the side of an impending shortage. The short-range forecasts, on the other hand,
as mode by similarly competent groups, are considered to be much more reliable. We
can discuss these figures with more confidence. In general, such studies predict we
will experience a sharp downward trend in B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees awarded in
chemistry and all engineering during the next four years.
If this downward trend continues, there is reason to believe that a shortage of some
proportions could develop in the supply of scientific and engineering graduates. As
responsible members of the chemical industry, I believe there is cause for us to be
- concerned over both the short and long range situation. I will not burden you with a
complete statistical analysis that supports this conclusion, but here are some significant
details.
First, undergraduate enrollments for majors in chemistry have historically increased
modestly each year. In 1970, however, the number of ft.. S. degrees awarded in
chemistry declined for the first time in 20 years. We conclude that a high "drop out"
rate between entry and graduation for chemistry majors has taken place.
Second, the number of first year graduate students in Ph.D. chemistry programs has
declined 25% since 1966. Statistics for each year indicate an increased number of
students who earn a degree in chemistry only as a "stepping stone" to careers in other
fields.
Third, undergraduate enrollments and earned degrees in engineering are declining
significantly. From the total engineering bachelor supply of 43,000 graduating in
1971, the output in 1975 is expected to fall to 31,000.
Against this background of rapidly-declining interest in scientific and engineering
degrees, there are some that claim that even larger decreases in the employed technical
woricforce may be necessary, as an adjustment to changing R & D priorities. If this be­
comes nee ssary, I susp ct w will find the students moving ever farther away from the
chemical industry, a developm nt we would all like to avoid if possible.
CMA 036214
The chemical industry, as you well know, is an industry of great complexity,
requiring many high level intellects to effectively develop, manage and operate
the enterprise. Our future ability to attract such individuals in the numbers required
will depend largely on the prestige of the occupation, working conditions and personal
opportunities for growth.
In attempting to assess future requirements for new graduate chemists and chemical
engineers, we make the prediction this number will remain a reasonably stable percentage
f the total industrial workforce. At the risk of oversimplification, we have reached this
conclusion by assuming two important opposing demand trends will tend to balance each
other. The downward trend involved R/D. During the past 25 years, i^ft activities
accounted for a large fraction of total technical employment. With this fraction tending
to become smaller, as R/D is de-emphasized, one can logically reason future needs for
chemists and chemical engineers in this area will diminish. On the other hand, an
upward trend involving newly-emerging problem areas, such as environmental control
and the impending energy crisis, which heretofore have not been factors of any signifi­
cance as users or chemically trained personnel, could possibly impose heavy future de­
mands against supply, offsetting losses in the I^D sector of the chemical industry. Con­
sequently, we believe continued reductions in chemistry and engineering majors and
earned degrees will likely leadto shortages of technical graduate manpower resources.
In view of the uncertainty surrounding future needs, it is tempting to adopt a "wait and
see" attitude. The Committee counsels against this, because to do so will undermine
the attractiveness of chemistry and the chemical industry as a oareer choice for students.
. Further, it will likely intensify the negative image many students and young faculty,
specially in non-science areas, have for the chemical and other technically-oriented
industry. And above all, we must bear in mind that the manpower problems we anticipate
in four or eight years are, in fact, today's problems because the new chemists and engineers
' we will hire then are in the educational pipeline now.
RESTORATION OF CONFIDENCE IN INDUSTRY
If you agree with me that there has indeed been a loss of confidence by the student body
in our industry, the question then arises as to what steps we can take to restore it. We
of the Committee feel this is a serious matter that should be promptly dealt with in some
positive way. In conjunction with the Public Relations Committee, we are organizing an
effort to define a program for your consideration. Meanwhile, I urge you to give, with
us, serious consideration to this matter so that the MCA and the industry can have an
important continuing influence on the educational system and on national manpower
planning commissions.
OBJECTIVES - PLANS - ACTIVITIES - ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Against the foregoing background, I would now like to report on our current programs
and activities. In 1971, the Board approved a realignment of our objectives and function
according t the greatly altered mployment and economic eonditi ns confr nting member
companies. Our objective became: "To promote through the educational system
public understanding of the chemical industry; to assist in career guidance; to enhance
the quality of education in chemistry, chemical engineering and interdisciplinary
fields related to chemistry; to promote the teaching of chemistry and related sciences
in a broad intellectual, cultural and social context at all levels of education." We
thus reaffirmed our primary mission to collaborate with educators and educational
systems. Our activities were then reorganized and channeled into three categories,
all judged to be of importance in attaining our objectives. These are:
Q
I
i
career guidance
chemical education
public understanding of the chemical industry
Each area of concern is assigned to a separate mibcommittee. Concerning their work,
the following is of interest.
CAREER GUIDANCE SUBCOMMITTEE
This group finds itself in the paradoxical situation of motivating students toward chemistry
at a time when trained scientists are unemployed. This contrasts with a past period of
more than two decades when expansion and growth of the industry assured multiple job
opportunities for each new chemist. Employment prospects prevailing at the time a
student made a career decision remained essentially unchanged 4 or 8 or 10 years later
when he entered the job market. Specialization was the "name of the game"; career
objectives for specific positions could be described succinctly in terms of course require­
ments and skills. Career guidance was then a very legitimate facet of recruitment in
advance, when there are concrete job openings. Only recently have some associations,
professional societies and companies abandoned this activity in view of changed conditions.
Some few years ago the Career Guidance Subcommittee began to redirect its efforts to
give greater emphasis to the variety of tasks performed in the chemical industry. There
is a continuing need for people with a chemical background but, as you know, the ap­
plication of their education and training might not conform to the traditional and
academic image of the chemist or chemical engineer. The subcommittee encourages
those with particular ability and interest in chemistry to a career in R & D. However,
for most in industry, the translation of theoretical information into practical realities
such as administration, marketing, personnel, liaison with government and public re­
lations defines “where the action is." Consequently, an education should be directed
to the broad spectrum of job opportunities and develop the individual interests and
skills of the student.
Several experimental career booklets were developed to present the new approach to
more than 4,500 educators, students and administrators who requested copies. A new
edition of the booklet will be distributed early next year, incorporating many helpful
suggesti ns received from teachers and students.
CMA 036216
|t is courageous to phase out old and luccessful programs and innovate when our
career guidance efforts rode the crest of the wave of acceptance among educators
and students. During the 1971-1972 fiscal year, for example, we filled requests
for more than 30,000 career booklets and 10,000 flyers. It is preferable, as you
will agree, to be ahead of change rather than unwitting victims of it.
This subcommittee also assists and encourages the increased number of those who
elect chemistry as a cultural background or as a foundation for careers in fields
such as medicine, law and marketing which have competing claims on technicallytrained men and women.
CHEMICAL EDUCATION SUBCOMMITTEE
This group spearheads efforts to influence chemical education. As a measure of our
success and acceptance among academic chemists during the past two years, members
f our committee have been participants by invitation at three major chemical education
conferences and at tke White House Conference on Youth. In the past year, we
collaborated, by invitation, with the National Science Foundation in the preliminary
planning and implementation of a new educational program in which industry and the
academe will jointly study the process of innovation and of expediting the process by
which new ideas are transferred into curricula or marketable products.
The work of this subcommittee is now focused in three areas:
College and High School Teacher Awards
Influence on Curricula
Interface Conferences
' College Awards; Since 19S7, MCA has honored 75 outstanding professors of chemistry
and chemical engineering. As one of the foremost national awards on the college level
in the U.S. and Canada, the program has attained prestige and is considered by many
r cent recipients as the pinnacle of their teaching careers.
In 1972, the six medalists were featured in a cover study in Chemical and Engineering
News and a cover headline in the Journal of Chemical Education, a first for MCA in
each of these magazines. In 1972, we received more than 430 inquiries and processed 182
nominations; both figures represent a high for the program. As of this date, we have proe ssed 294 inquiries and 74 nominations for the 1973 program.
V*IT
In the last two years we conferred five college awards on the campus of the recipient.
S veral of you represented MCA at these ceremonies and contributed to this new
dimension of industry-education contact. As a result of these campus ceremonies,
several major institutions re-evaluated their programs honoring excellence among their
faculty, another plans to initiate an honors convocation and another broke an old
tradition and gave public notice of the award at commencement.
CMA 036217
6
Our college awards have been one of our least expensive but highest return
activities.
High School Awards: Since 1964, MCA has honored more than 199 secondary school
teachers with local awards of $200. The program, administered by Chemical Industry
Councils, was restricted to teachers within the locale of the council. In 1973,
we will open the program, making any teacher in the U.S. and Canada eligible for
a regional award of $200 or for the new national award of $1,000. The expanded
program has aroused an enthusiastic response. To date, we have processed 66 requests
for information and nomination forms.
Influence on Curricula; For almost 10 years the Chemical Education Subcommittee
has promoted the inclusion of practical chemistry from industry into chemistry courses
on the high school and lower college levels. When we first made the suggestion, our
message went unheeded among educators who intensified the theoretical content of
their chemistry courses. Recently, other associations, professional societies, major
chemical education conferences and educators concur with our proposal. We collaborate
with educators to ensure that the industrial world of chemistry is a necessary adjunct to
theory.
In 1967, the first title in a 10 book, MCA-sponsored "Chemistry in Action Series" was
published by Doubleday. The books related practical stories and personal accounts of
the world of industry. Almost 100,000 copies, like the two samples I have here, have
been sold to enrich high school and lower level college chemistry courses. Eight of
these titles appear in foreign language editions similar to this Japanese version of
Water is Everybody's Business, and one title in a U.S. Information Service edition in
Ind ia. the ftooks beportment of the American Chemical Society now publishes the
series. We cooperate in enlisting authors and assisting in the preparation of manuscripts .
Since 1961, Holt, Rinehard and Winston published four MCA-sponsored innovative
laboratory manuals for elementary and secondary schools. More than 165,000 copies
have been sold. MCA is widely known and esteemed for this service. We will request
modest funding to up-date one of these manuals in the next fiscal year.
We canvassed member companies and mode significant suggestions for the Objectives
and Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in Chemistry for the Committee on Prof ssional Training of ACS. John Howard of Kodak, member of both our and the ACS
committee, summarized and submitted our recommendations. In the past six months,
the chairman of the ACS committee acknowledged our contributions before more than 300
chairmen of college chemistry departments and, on another occasion, before more than 450
educators.
Interface Conferences; We initiated experimental and innovative conferences of
students, educators and industrial people. We have seen the effectiveness and
predict an increasing need for this type of dialog. Members of the subcommittee share
their exp rience with member companies who have organized similar sessions.
CMA 036218
b
7
PUBLIC UNDERSTANDING OF THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY SUBCOMMITTEE
The third and newest subcommittee of the Education Activities Committee promotes
gr ater public understanding of the chemical industry through the educational system.
Their efforts are directed primarily to the non-science student and faculty who harbor
a negative attitude toward technically-oriented industry. Many of these apostles,
to be sure, have the naivete of youth but share with us in industry a bigness of concern
f r society. Their zeal and energies seek direction toward constructive as well as
destructive goals. Though some would "write off" this group as ignorant, our contact
with them through interface seminars indicates that they have done their homework well
but often lack an over-all and balanced view of a particular problem. They are un­
informed, for the most part, of the accomplishments of industry for society. However,
they are open and willing to learn and change their attitudes.
The subcommittee coordinates its efforts with Mrs. Walton's Consumer Information
Subcommittee. We make suitable education materials available to Mrs. Walton's
committee and distribute their materials designed to educate the general public
through our education channels. On three occasions we combined the Consumer Inf rmation and Education exhibits to stretch our exhibit dollars and to reach new audiences
f science and non-science oriented publics. At the suggestion of the Consumer Information
group, we published a manual of simple chemical demonstrations suitable for the general
public and have another manual of simple food experiments in the rough manuscript staga.
MCA's education exhibit provides us the opportunity to present all our programs and
t discuss them with educators. This past year more than 2,500 educators visited our
booth at one regional and three national education conferences. This year we have
scheduled six exhibits in all sections of the U.S. and seek similar contacts with
Canadian educators.
The two subcommittees also coordinated their efforts in presenting the seminar
"Catalyst '72 — Is Science Necessary”?, which I hope many of you were able to
attend this morning.
The impact of electronic media on this generation indicates that the printed word
is no longer the only effective avenue of communication. An experimental tape
for campus radio, classroom or private listening was produced. Film clips, slide
lectures and audio courses are some of the means of communication which we will
propose to you for future budget allocations.
As I indicated earlier, there is on the drawing boards a joint task force with the Public
Relations Committee to study the negative image of industry among youth and make
recommendations on what industry can do to stem the tide of unfair criticism which, as
you know, often creates the unfavorable climate for adverse and restrictive legislation.
Our work, like public relations, is never ending. There is no such thing as a stable or
one-time public. Publics are like rivers - more water always feeding into a stream
which never stands still and n ver is quite the same at any one point of reference.
CMA 036219
Thii about brings ma to the and of my report.
Before closing, I would like to thank you, the member companies who are represented
on the Committee and the staff of the MCA, for the strong support given the EAC.
The Committee membership is listed in the new MCA directory. The individuals named
and the MCA staff form a team of highly motivated, dedicated, competent professionals
of varied disciplines giving great breadth of experience to our work. From a purely
personal point of view, may I say it is both a pleasure and a privilege to work with
them.
In this brief report, I have listed only the highlights of our problems, accomplishments
and future plans. I am sure that you have many other questions related to our work. I
will be happy to respond either before you adjourn this meeting or later.
I thank you.
CMA 036220
k
Proposed
Research Program
on
Carcinogenic Potential of Vinyl Chloride
EXHIBIT A
Purpose
The purpose of this program is to provide scientific
information to clarify the status of vinyl chloride (monomer)
in reference to carcinogenicity.
Proj ect
As recommended by an Ad Hoc Planning Group for Vinyl
Chloride Research, composed of representatives of eight MCA
member companies, the project is to contract for animal test­
ing research under which experimental animals would inhale
vinyl chloride monomer vapor at selected concentration levels
and be examined in accord with an agreed-upon testing and
examination protocol.
Planned duration of the project is
three years.
According to quotations from Industrial Bio-Test
Laboratories, Inc., with which the contract is in prospect,
and an allowance for vinyl chloride supply and contingencies,
the projected cost is $193,000.
Funding
Funding commitments have been received from seventeen
MCA member companies sufficient in the aggregate to cover the
stated cost. Company shares are pro-rated on the basis of
publicly announced tonnage production capacity for vinyl
chloride monomer plus polyvinyl chloride.
Disbursements are to be subject to MCA staff clearance
and approval.
Supervision
The program is to be supervised on MCA's behalf by a
Technical Task Group on Vinyl Chloride Research composed of
one technical representative from each subscribing company,
plus an MCA staff representative to serve as secretary.
Administratively, the Task Group is to function under
the jurisdiction of the Occupational Health Committee.
CMA 036228
Stipulations
The scientific information developed from this program
is to be fully disclosed, without restriction.
For purposes
of consistency and control, however, all releases are to be
made solely through MCA, normally based on Task Group rec­
ommendations as to nature and timing.
This requirement would
not preclude private scientific interchange of non-competitive
information useful to advancement of the program, nor relevant
private communication within and among subscribing companies.
It would be an obligation to inform the MCA staff representa­
tive on a current basis about all such related interchanges
and communications other than those internal to the company.
Operation
The Task Group is to be governed by the requirements of
MCA's "General Principles Applicable to the Structure and Op­
erations of Committees" and the Rules of Organization and Pro­
cedure of the Occupational Health Committee.
MCA
CMA 036229
exhibit d
STAFF REPORT
January 1973
by
William J. Driver
TAX REFORM...hearings before the House Ways and
mittee are likely to begin early in the next session
As long ago as last June, that Committee's Chairman,
Mills (D.-Ark.), indicated the issue would be number
ority.
Means Com­
of Congress.
Wilbur
one pri­
Less certain is the nature and scope of such hearings.
While various members of Congress have announced that they will
sponsor "loophole-plugging" bills. Mills has avoided advocating
sweeping reforms.
The Administration is expected to introduce its tax reform
proposal early in order to take the initiative.
Comments by
various Treasury Department officials indicate the Administra­
tion will emphasize tax simplification rather than substantive
reform.
Treasury Under Secretary Edwin S. Cohen stated recently
that he expected Congress to take under consideration the Asset
Depreciation Range (ADR) system, the investment taut credit, and
the minimum tax on tax preference income.
It is also expected
that capital gains will come up for congressional review.
Some Administration officials have been advocating early
Congressional consideration of trade reform legislation ahead of
tax legislation, both of which are handled by the House Ways
and Means Committee. Mr. Mills is reported to have indicated
that he would put trade legislation before tax reform if President
Nixon should request it. We understand, however, that the
President has not yet made a decision on either the nature of
trade legislation to be proposed by the Administration, or on
the tactical issue of when to present it.
TRADE POLICY...in the new Nixon Administration will operate
under new leadership.
The President has indicated that, in addition to his Cabinet
duties, Treasury Secretary Shultz will take charge of overall
economic policy.
The imminent departure of Commerce Secretary Peterson should
restore the Department of State to some eminence in trade policy
matters.
No changes have been indicated so far in the Office of the
Special Trade Representative.
However, the President has
accepted r signations from a number of International Economic
Policy Council staff memb rs, presently headed by Peter Flanigan.
CWA 036246
Staff Report
January 1973
Page 2
9
THE CONTROVERSY...over tank car mileage allowances continues.
On November 24, the railroads filed a reply to statements by
MCA and other intervenors with the Interstate Commerce Commission
The railroads:
Resist updating of base classification values (BCV's) ,
attacking the basic system and claiming that a single
percentage trending factor is inappropriate,
Criticized our proposal to raise the value ceiling to
$40,000, contending that linings and special materials
relate to the "package" function of a tank car, and
Continued legal objections to ICC's power to prescribe
specific allowances.
The railroad document was lengthy.
Therefore, to permit
adequate evaluation and response, additional time to comment was
requested in our behalf and that of the American Petroleum
Institute, car lining companies and other supporters.
Four
weeks were granted; reply statements are now due January 8, 1973.
NIOSH...the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, is conducting a National Occupational Hazard Survey —
a statistical study designed to collect pertinent information
regarding biological, physical and chemical exposures to indus­
trial workers. Accompanied by management representatives, NIOSH
surveyors tour industrial plants, noting exposures to different
occupational groups.
Seventy-five percent of the data collected is reported as
exposures to trade name compounds.
However, the Institute's
ultimate goal is to develop information on exposures to specific
chemicals, not trade name products.
Therefore, NIOSH desires
ingredient information for each trade name item reported to
them.
To obtain this information they propose to send a letter
and a "request form" (one for each trade name product) to about
5000 manufacturers.
Response would be mandatory.
There is obvious concern that trade secret information
might leak from the NIOSH files.
Therefore a panel meeting
under the Office of Management and Budget is being arranged,
and MCA companies will have an opportunity to express their
views regarding the need for assurances of confidentiality
beyond those already expressed in the Occupational Safety and
Health Act.
I
CMA 036246
Staff Report
January 1973
Page 3
THE ASSOCIATION...participated in a recent meeting in
Geneva of the United Nations1 Committee of Experts on the Trans
port of Dangerous Goods.
Attending were: A. C. Clark, Assist­
ant Technical Director, Transportation and Distribution and
Dr. C. Boyd Shaffer, Director of Toxicology, American Cyanamid
Company.
The latter served as an advisor on definitions and
classifications of toxic materials.
Actions taken at this meeting will result in publication
of a supplement to United Nations recommendations (1970) on
the classification, packaging and labeling of hazardous
materials in international trade.
t
THE ASSOCIATION...has offered recommendations to the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the professional
qualifications deemed necessary to membership on its Effluent
Standards and Water Quality Information Advisory Committee.
We also offered to suggest candidates suiting these qualifica­
tions .
ASSOCIATION TASK GROUPS...are continuing to work with EPA
in the development of effluent guidelines for the categories of
organics, inorganics, plastics and synthetics.
EPA has already issued guidance documents to its ten Regional
Offices for their interim use in drafting discharge permits for
plastics and synthetics and is entering into contracts with
consultants who will recommend a basis for establishing Best
Practicable Control Technology Currently Available, Best Avail­
able Technology Economically Achievable, and National Standards
of Performance for new discharge sources.
It is anticipated
that individual plants judged to be "exemplary" will provide the
base for the required levels of technological performance.
CMA 036247
Staff Report
January 1973
Page 4
THE WATER RESOURCES COMMITTEE...has established eight task
groups to deal with particular aspects of regulations under the
1972 amendments to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
In this regard, we have already commented to EPA regarding:
(1) proposed regulations relating to State discharge permit
programs and forms for discharge permit applications and (2) a
draft document relating to pretreatment standards for discharges
into municipal systems.
A SOLID WASTES MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE...task group and other
interested company representatives are reviewing an EPA draft
document on ocean disposal guidelines and will maintain dialogue
with that agency in the development of ensuing Federal regula­
tions .
DR. HERMAN S. BLOCH...Associate
Universal Oil Products and a 10-year
Activities Committee (EAC), has been
American Chemical Society's Board of
Director of Research for
veteran of MCA's Education
named Chairman of the
Directors.
Dr. Bloch has been one of the prime catalysts for MCA/ACS
collaboration in such EAC projects as the "Chemistry In Action"
series, Open-Ended Experiments, Awards and Interface Conferences.
He served as EAC Chairman from 1969-1971.
CMA 036248
1423
(cl Additional Capital Assets.
The value of furniture and
equipment was not reflected in the auditors' Statement of Assets, Liabilities,
and Fund Balances because acquisitions of these items are charged to ex­
pense when purchased. The auditors, however, have determined that the
depreciated value of these assets on hand as of May- 31, 1973, was $51, 769. 94.
An inventory by the staff of MCA publications held for sale as of
May 31, 1973, was $1 1 1, 997. As in the case of furniture and equipment, the
value of publications was not shown in the auditors' Statement of Assets,
Liabilities, and Fund Balances since the cost of publications is charged to
expense when printed.
III.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
101st Annual Meeting.
(1) Program Arrangements and Registration.
Mr. Brown
summarized plans for the special reception being given by the Directors for
the Executive Contacts of member companies on the following evening, point­
ing out that its purpose was to bring about closer communication between the
Board of Directors and member company executive contacts in keeping with l
the emphasis on better communication throughout the Association contained in
the Kane Committee Report; Directors were urged to make maximum utiliza­
tion of the reception for this purpose.
Mr. Carnes reported that advance registration for the
Annual Meeting totaled 900 to be accommodated in The Greenbrier with 11
others in local motels, 164 member companies being represented.
(2) Future Annual Meeting Dates.
The Secretary-Treasurer
reported that the management of The Greenbrier had confirmed the following
dates for the Annual Meeting for the next five years:
June
June
June
June
June
12-14, 1975
10-12, 1976
(b) Proposed Epidemiological Study on Vinyl Chloride.
Forwarded
to Directors in advance of the meeting and presented by Chairman Wilson was a
proposal for an epidemiological study on vinyl chloride involving the medical
records of industrially exposed workers and supplementing the animal testing
program approved in January 1973, copy appended as Exhibit A. The proposed
study had been considered and its approval recommended by the Executive Com­
mittee.
CMA 012531
1424
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded,
it was,
VOTED: That the proposed epidemiological
study on vinyl chloride, as set forth in Ex­
hibit A, be approved.
(c) Report of Subcommittee Studying Means to Increase MCA
Effectiveness, Particularly in Government Relations Area.
Forwarded to
Directors in advance of the meeting and summarized by Dr. Kane was the
report of the subcommittee, of which he was chairman, appointed to study
means to increase MCA effectiveness, particularly in Government Relations
area, copy appended as Exhibit B.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it
was,
VOTED: That the report of the subcommittee,
as set forth in Exhibit B, together with its
recommended agenda for MCA Board meetings
and schedule of 1973-74 Directors' meetings,
be approved and, further, that the subcommittee
be congratulated for its fine work.
(d) Proposed Extension of Tenure of the Ad Hoc Committee on
Chemicals Regulation.
Forwarded to Directors in advance of the meeting
and presented by Chairman Wilson was a proposal to extend the tenure of the
Ad Hoc Committee on Chemicals Regulation, copy appended as Exhibit C.
The proposal had been considered by the Executive Committee at its meeting
earlier in the day and its approval recommended.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it
was,
VOTED: That the proposed extension of
tenure of the Ad Hoc Committee on Chemicals
Regulation, as set forth in Exhibit C, be ap­
proved.
(e) Report of Membership Committee.
In the absence of Chair­
man Drake, the Secretary-Treasurer reported on behalf of the Membership
Committee that applications had been received from Dixie Chemical Company,
Inc. , of Houston, Texas, and Rubicon Chemicals Inc. of Geismar, Louisiana,
and that in the opinion of the Membership Committee the applicants were
qualified for membership under the Association's Bylaws.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it
was,
VOTED: That the applicants be elected to
membership in the Association.
CMA 012532
EXHIBIT A
Proposed
Epidemiological Study on Vinyl Chloride
Supplementary to the animal testing program on
vinyl chloride (monomer) approved in January 1973 for
MCA administration, there is a desire to proceed now
with an epidemiological study of the medical records of
industrially exposed workers.
Companies that are also supporting the animal
testing program have volunteered funds on the same sub­
scription basis to defray anticipated costs ranging
from a probable minimum of $72,000 up to a tentatively
estimated maximum of about $92,000.
Tabershaw-Cooper Associates, Inc., Berkeley,
Calif., has been chosen to conduct the study, after
consideration of several candidates.
A time period of
eight months has been projected.
Management of the project on behalf of MCA would
follow the same pattern as provided for the animal
testing program.
MCA
CMA 012533
EXHIBIT B
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
1825 CONNECTICUT AVENUE, N. W.
WASHINGTON, D. C, 20009
(202) 483-6126
May 8, 1973
MCA Board of Directors
From:
Special Committee:
Edward R. Kane, Chairman
H. Harold Bible
George W. Russell
FINAL REPORT
The objective of this committee, formed at the February-Executive
Committee meeting, was to study how to make MCA more effective, with
particular reference to, but not limited to, Washington and government
relations. A preliminary report was made to the Executive Committee
and to the Board in March, and several suggestions were approved.
The committee feels that this report represents only a first step
towards strengthening MCA and that the effectiveness of MCA ought to be
reviewed annually by the Executive Committee and the Board.
Discussions with a cross section of Board members, MCA staff,
and member company personnel serving on MCA committees and on the
Washington scene pointed to a central need and opportunity to improve
communications. The committee believes MCA's communications can be
improved in a number of areas by eliminating layering, sharpening objec­
tives, focusing efforts on key groups, and coordinating the activities of
various parts of the Association.
Therefore, the following steps are recommended to strengthen
MCA's communications:1
1. The agenda for Board meetings should be revamped to include
additional reports from chairmen of technical and functional committees,
a regular review of legislative activity by the Director of Government Re­
lations, and periodic reports from other MCA staff members, as set forth
in the recommended agenda attached as Exhibit A. The four Board Liaison
Committees should be eliminated. Also, the scene should be set in a way
CMA 036303
that will permit pointed questioning regarding, and critical discussion of,
MCA affairs.
2. At least two more Board meetings should be held each year in
Washington to focus attention on governmental matters and to facilitate con­
tacts with government personnel. A recommended schedule of Board meet­
ings for 1973-74 is attached as Exhibit B.
3. Closer communication between Executive Contacts, especially
thoae who are MCA Board members, and personnel from their companies
who serve on technical and functional committees is very much in order and
needs to be encouraged.
4. The Executive Committee, in conformity with suggested changes
in Board procedures and in addition to its present activities, should make an
annual review of MCA1 a effectiveness, including the work of, as well as the
need for, the various committees. Any action which would have a significant
financial impact should be decided upon prior to January, when development
of the budget begins. The Executive Committee should also formulate a list
of the most critical issues facing the industry and indicate those issues for
which MCA positions should be developed.
A letter should be sent from the Chairman of the Board to all
Executive Contacts following the June 1973 Greenbrier meeting outlining the
newly adopted approaches and procedures for the 1973-74 MCA year, and
soliciting their active interest and participation.
Board Meetings
The agenda for Board meetings will be prepared by the President,
following consultation as appropriate with the Chairman of the Board and
sent to the Directors well in advance of meetings. Routine business of the
Association should be dealt with briefly on the assumption that Directors had
read the material which was supplied prior to the meeting.
Of considerable importance is the arrangement of the agenda in such
a way that there can be appropriate questioning and discussion regarding
important MCA matters. At some past meetings, several Board members
have felt the opportunity for meaningful discussion was limited or precluded.
Providing for frank deliberation will permit a fuller contribution from the
Board and will recognize the considerable investment of time by Board mem­
bers. However, this increased participation by the Board in MCA affairs
should not be permitted to diminish the role and the effectiveness of the Ex­
ecutive Committee.
The President would present first an overview of MCA's situation,
providing perspective and priorities with regard to important issues, op­
portunities, and problems.
CMA 036304
This would be'followed by a brief legislative report from the
Director of Government Relations plus reports from any other members
of the MCA staff who have an important matter to bring to the Board's
attention.
Next, three or four chairmen of technical or functional com­
mittees would report on substantive matters pending in those committees.
Routine organizational matters and accomplishments should be excluded.
The four Board Liaison Committees have helped a great deal, but there
is a prevailing opinion that the growing complexity and importance of the
issues the industry is facing require the active and direct involvement of
the Board, and that to shorten communications lines the liaison Commit­
tees should be dissolved.
One-third of the 24 MCA committees currently have chairmen
from companies which are not represented on the Board. When one of
these chairmen reports to the Board, the Executive Contact from his com­
pany should be invited to attend the meeting.
The above format would normally take two hours, and this time
should be regularly allotted in planning schedules.
Two more Washington Board meetings (January and October)
would improve communications considerably. Such meetings would also
help focus Board attention on the critical matters in the governmental
area, and provide an opportunity the night before the Board meeting for
members to have dinner with government people. The successful Chemical
Forum luncheons would be tied in the next day. Good staff work and coor­
dinated efforts are called for here to see that MCA interests are effectively
conveyed to the government.
With regard to regional Board meetings, the Program Commit­
tee ought to devote special attention to increasing their value to those at­
tending by providing a program which contributes insight into regional
industry interests, especially governmental activities.
Government Relations Activity
Communications among the Government Relations staff, other
MCA staff members, the technical and functional committees, and Wash­
ington representatives of member companies should be improved through
more formalized procedures.
In the past, MCA has been stymied at times by an inability to
reach unanimous agreement in the various committees on what position to
take and by a cumbersome clearance procedure. In the future, commit­
tees should try to proceed promptly to a decision and where unanimity is
unattainable, majority and minority views should be referred to the Execu­
tive Committee for consideration.
CMA 036306
Exhibit A
Recommended Agenda for MCA Board Meetings
Opening Remarks and Introduction of Guests.
Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting.
III.
Approval ofReport of Secretary-Treasurer.
Forwarded in advance of the meeting; no summary required.
MCA Business Items.
Brief discussion; material forwarded in advance.
President's Report.
An overview of MCA activities and major issues facing
the Association. Priorities and timing are indicated,
and advance notice is provided on the need for develop­
ment of positions. Discussion of other important matters
with Directors.
Report from Director of Government Relations.
VII.
Reports from other MCA Staff Groups,
VIII.
Reports from Chairmen of Technical and Functional Committees.
Adjournment.
CMA 036306
Exhibit D
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
BAILEY BARTON, CHAIRMAN
AIR QUALITY COMMITTEE
APRIL 13,
1976
It is a pleasure to be here today to report on the Air Quality
Committee's activities.
Since my last presentation, in February,
1975, we have, I believe, made some substantial contributions to
the interests of the Manufacturing Chemists Association.
I would be remiss, however, if I characterized our efforts
as being successful in meeting our objectives.
You may recall that
I described 1975 as the "year of opportunity" for amending the Clean
Air Act in a positive way.
It is true that the activity of Congress
in Clean Air Legislation served to restrain the fervor of the EPA in
enforcing 1975 deadlines of the Clean Alp Act—as did a few court
cases—but the legislation actually emerging from Congressional Com­
mittees offers precious little prospect of making the Act more rea­
sonable.
It appears, in fact, that our environmentalist friends also
saw 1975 as a "year of opportunity" and seized the initiative in in­
fluencing even more stringent provisions than previously existed.
Industry may, for example, petition extension from the previous dead­
lines, but must meet rigid criteria, waive some of its rights, and be
prepared to either post performance bonds or actually pay penalties
for the delay.
Most critical, however, are the provisions of both
House and Senate defining "antidegradation" or "significant deteri­
oration" in arbitrary numerical or percentage terms.
These provi­
sions, coupled with another "planning" process, cannot avoid a
substantial and inevitable confrontation with industrial growth and
development.
Undoubtedly, you are already aware of these and other extra­
polations of these amendments, so I won't belabor the issues.
Our
Committee prepared, and MCA submitted, several commentaries and
position papers to Congress on these amendments—as have many trade
associations.
Some concessions have been obtained—but the only
positive report I can make, today, is that these amendments are not
yet law.
Until they become so, I pledge the Air Quality Committ
1s
continued diligence in attempting to bring about constructive leg­
islation.
CMA 036912
l
2
We have also been very active in Environmental Protection Ag ncy
r gulatory proceedings.
The two areas which were cited last year are
still the "hot" ones.
EPA, with one notable exception, has elected to j
employ Section III to regulate emissions of substances which the Admin- >
istrator may reasonably believe constitute^ a hazard.
The exception,
of course, is the Agency's choice of Section 112—the imminent hazard
provision—to propose vinyl chloride monomer limitations.
The Agency
1
has found that regulation of such emissions as sulfuric acid mist using .
Section III requires far leas substantiation than a new ambient air
quality standard.
Moreover, EPA prefers the equipment efficiency
approach—best practicable treatment, if you will—fthich this section
provides.
We believe our Committee's careful scrutiny of these regu­
lations, and the propensity of individual company members to litigate
the issues they challenge, have served to reduce the rate of promulga­
tion of such regulations.
We expect to continue following Agency action
from inception to promulgation on the multitude of materials waiting—
In this way, we believe MCA member compa- •
nies will profit by both technical input and up-to-date communication
of impending problems.
The second area I mentioned last year has a special significance.
The hydrocarbon-photochemical oxidant issue—embryonic last February—
has reached full flower as a published policy of EPA.
You may r call
that the Agency has concluded that all hydrocarbon emissions are ulti­
mately oxidant—or smog—forming compounds and must be controlled.
They are pressuring the states to tighten-up hydrocarbon emission lim­
its in the hypothetical hope of meeting ambient air oxidant standards.
This is being manifest in storage tank vapor control.requirements,
revision of the former "Rule 66" photochemically-reactive compound
limits to reflect broader "volatile organic,” and, generally, in the
transportation control strategy approach.
Major impact of this shift in EPA policy is being felt by our
industry in the State of Texas where hydrocarbon controls are being
thrust upon them by EPA's infamous Region VI.
In an effort to head
off the potentially large expenditures thus required, the MCA-affil­
iate Texas Chemical Council has requested our assistance.
Locally,
th y have been joined by the Houston Chamber of Commerce and possess
the indirect support of the Texas Air Quality Board staff.
Through
its own channels, the American Petroleum Institute is pursuing a
parallel course of opposition to EPA's hypothesis.
l
1
CMA0M913
In a November, 1975 presentation to top MCA staff and Air
Quality Committee officers, TCC leadership provided the outlines
of a four-point program.
The more-detailed technical plans were
presented to the full Air Quality Committee in January, 1976 in
Houston, Texas—where we had shifted our meeting for the purpose.
Our Committee sought out portions of the TCC program in which we
could best serve all member companies.
We are preparing endeavors
to obtain emission control cost data from member companies and
definitive information on hydrocarbon-oxidant relationships in
several cities.
Specific proposals for Board authorization of
funding should be completed shortly and, in our view, they repre­
sent substantive support to the Texas Chemical Council's request
for help.
This is also a primary result of our Committee's rather
difficult task' of negotiating a veritable maze of alternative
approaches to this very complex question.
In a related develop­
ment, EPA has invited MCA AQC participation in a Reactivity
Task Group which we expect will provide another avenue to explor­
ing the uncertainties of supporting data in the near future.
I am aware that it has been over a year since I told you that
$100,000 was a reasonable sum to budget for this effort—and I am
grateful that you chose to budget half-that, $50,000, even though
we have not until now, offered a specific recommendation for its
expenditure.
The data base which supports EPA's contentions has
so many uncertainties that we have deemed it necessary to explore
numerous possible avenues before focusing on the one which we
,believe to be most productive in terms of value received for money
spent.
I appreciate your patience in this matter and believe that
our Committee's deliberations since TCC's first request in November
will reward their patience as well.
I won't belabor the other Com­
mittee and intercommittee activities which are underway.
The fore­
going have occupied most of the AQC's recent attention and are
exemplary.
Turning to another area, of Committee Activity—one to which
the Board responded to a concern expressed by all environmental
committee officers last year—we very much appreciate the guidance
offered by Dr. Taufen's committee in resolving MCA Staff and tech­
nical committee relationship problems.
Clair, Mr. Anderson, and Dr. Barnes were very sensitive to the
CMA 036914
4
questions and comments which arose in our several sessions, and
encouraged initiation of communications sessions which have taken
us far down the road of enlightenment.
This, I hope, will continue
since it serves both the Committees and the MCA staff—and, ulti­
mately, the membership of MCA.
Additionally, I would personally
recommend periodic, detailed review by a Board committee to insure
expeditious resolution of staff/Comnittee conflicts.
I must mention two remaining problem areas which I view as
chronic.
First, the delicate statutory and regulatory aspects of
our work require—indeed they demand—a unique technical—legal
partnership to maximize effectiveness.
We engineers tend to over­
look legal subtleties in calculating the true effects of governmen­
tal proposals, so we need to rehearse our thoughts in concert with
detail-minded working lawyers.
The Legal Advisory Committee has
addressed this issue and has offered constructive recommendations.
However, translation of the abstract into the concrete has been
difficult to consummate.
The Air Quality Committee could be more
effective if we had a participating attorney in our meetings and
statutory/regulatory reviews.
I bring another unresolved—or perhaps I should say, "Tem­
porarily" resolved—problem to your attention today because I view
it as a chronic and strength-sapping enigma.
For most of 1975 we
had four nominees and no place for them.
The by-laws say for us
to rotate off members when this situation exists--but every plan
* offered was rejected by the full committee.
Finally, the officers
chose, in the face of indignation, rebuke and even a threatened
lawsuit, to rotate off four lax attendees and seat the nominees,
but much valuable meeting time had been lost in the debate.
In
my view, our recent solution will only last until the next nominee
comes along.
I will close my oral remarks by looking ahead to future endeavors
^for a few moments.
I see the Air Quality Committee's attention phasing
from the old "nuts and bolts" control aspect into the more exotic
health effects arena.
This will require a broader, much more sophis­
ticated data base, and perhaps more health oriented personnel to make
meaningful contributions to Association interests.
I also envision
a Committee/staff necessity to do much more extensive image building—
or more properly—image repairing to counter the chemicals = cancer
CMA 036915
5
psychology.
Somehow we must convince Congress of our value.
And
most importantly, i believe we are all a part of a fundamental
struggle to keep free enterprise a viable concept in today's hostile
climate.
You gentlemen, our
leaders, our mentors, and our sage ad­
visors, hold the key to whether my generation will take the reins of
our great American corporations or be relegated to civil servants in
a new bureaucracy, formerly called business.
total success.
I
i
CMA 036916
Exhibit E
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
DENNIS P. BRIDGE, CHAIRMAN
SOLID WASTES MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
APRIL 13, 1976
The primary Solid Wastes Management Committee (SWMC) concern
is for legislative proposals for so-called "Hazardous Waste
Materials".
For the last several years the SWMC reports have
indicated legislative activity during the previous year and the
expectation of restrictive legislation the following year. Al­
though I am pleased to say that these forebodings have not come
to pass, I quickly note that the current situation is quite
similar to that of past years — legislation may well be passed
during this elect'ion year.
The first significant act dealing
with solid waste was passed in 1965 and the second legislative
action followed in 1970.
During 1975 there was legislative
activity in this area and, assuming five years to be a reasonable
gestation period, 1976 could be the year.
This legislation will
not be as far reaching as that being proposed for toxic substances,
but it will significantly impact chemical process industry (CPI)
operations.
Since the last SWMC report to the Board, there have been
nine major legislative proposals, either actual bills or working
"drafts, concerning solid waste.
Of these the Senate Public Works
Committee Bill S. 2150 sponsored by Senator Jennings Randolph
and the House Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee, Sub­
committee on Transportation and Commerce working draft as sponsored
by Congressman Rooney, are the two most likely candidates for
enactment.
The Administration has not sponsored a bill but has
indicated general support of S. 2150. We expect that each
proposal will reach its respective floor in May.
Although with some undesirable provisions. Senator Randolph's
bill is certainly the more acceptable of the two proposals.
Both
documents contain "Hazardous Waste" sections, but S. 2150 is much
less complicated and it does not require federal approval for all
permits for waste transport, treatment and storage, but rather
concentrates on state implementation of a permit system similar
to current air and water requirements.
The Rooney proposal
requires permits at both levels.
In addition it addresses several
CMA 036917
1
i
i
i
areas not included in S. 2150 such as product and container control
as a means of source waste reduction and tax incentives for recycling. We believe that the Rooney working draft will be modified
to resemble the Senate Public Works proposal.
Whatever the final form of the legislation, MCA will strongly
espouse the concept of performance requirements for waste disposal
rather than the predetermination or specification approach currently
being fostered. Waste should be deemed hazardous only after its
toxicity, quantity and disposal site have been carefully considered.
Predetermination of a waste disposal method without investigating
each of these parameters is counterproductive because this restricts
development of new technology and precludes the use of viable
alternatives appropriate to specific geographical areas or to
available equipment. MCA will contend that the authority over
the areas of packaging, transportation and storage of waste
materials continue to be vested in the U.S. Department of Trans­
portation.
Should adoption of a permit system be unavoidable,
we will advocate that the disposal site rather than the generator
be the permittee and that state implementation of the permit
system under federal guidelines is preferred over direct federal
intervention.
Finally, to provide for reasonable regulatory
requirements from both a technical and economic viewpoint, we
will strive for sufficient time constraints and flexibility in
any legislation to accommodate the dearth of technology and disposal cost data currently available to us.
Many of the states, most notably Texas and California, have
, passed solid waste management legislation dealing with hazardous
wastes.
Because this legislation has preceded federal hazardous
waste disposal activity, it is quite likely that the EPA may
adopt those concepts fostered by these states which have proven
to be most workable.
SWMC monitors "Bellwether" states for
concepts which might be incorporated into federal regulations.
In addition liaison is being maintained with the National Solid
Waste Management Association (NSWMA) to monitor its efforts to
develop a legislative guide for use by each state.
Ai
1
SWMC legislative activity is directed almost solely to
disposal of hazardous wastes.
Chemical packaging has not been
raised as an issue to date.
Should this occur, SWMC will ask the
Chemical Packaging Committee's assistance on this matter which
is of vital importance to the CPI from a marketing as well as
disposal viewpoint.
tl
CMA 036918
A secondary but very important SWMC concern is meaningful
liaison with the EPA.
Solid waste control is unique among environ­
mental concerns because the EPA has had a relatively long lead
time to perform research and gather data to establish regulations
on a more scientific basis while still complying with the stringent
time frame expected in the enabling legislation,
SWMC feels it important, especially in view of EPA's intent,
to present MCA positions at every opportunity.
During the past
year there have been three salient examples of SWMC work with EPA:
First, during our May 20-21, 1975 meeting, EPA's Office
of Solid Waste Management Programs (OSWMP) representatives
made a presentation on an EPA $5.4 million landfill project
being conducted with the state of Minnesota.
This project
is intended to determine the effectiveness of modern land­
fill design and operational techniques.
Several member
companies are following this work closely.
Second, on
December 4, 1975, at one of four EPA public meetings on
hazardous waste, the Chairman of SWMC presented comprehensive
testimony on behalf of MCA in response to a formal EPA
request for such information.
The EPA is now developing
synopses of the various comments as a basis for its position
on legislation and on subsequent regulations.
Finally, a
meeting was held with personnel from the EPA's Solid and
Hazardous Waste Research Division, Municipal Environmental
Research Laboratory in Cincinnati, Ohio in conjunction with
a regular SWMC meeting.
SWMC members have repeatedly
expressed a desire to investigate the possibilities of
contracting research work to fill existing data gaps in the
area of landfill disposal of potentially hazardous wastes.
To avoid duplication it is important that we ascertain the
scope of EPA research activities. The EPA presentation and
suggestions were well received and very beneficial in
guiding us toward an appropriate research activity, to be
identified by our Technical Subcommittee.
A compendium of 15 successful case histories of waste
recycling or residua disposal is being developed by the Technical
Subcommittee. This document will provide positive CPI input to
various legislative and regulatory proposals with respect to the
significant amount of current work within industry on disposal of
potentially hazardous wastes.
A joint subcommittee, composed of representatives of the
SWMC and Water Resources Committee, was formed in 1974 to develop
guidelines for deep-well disposal.
This document has just been
published.
CMA 036919
The concept of land use regulation continues to disturb
SWMC members and representatives of the other environmental
committees.
Land use legislation could be the most insidious
tool available to those who would punitively regulate the CPI.
Forms of land use regulation are currently embodied in federal
air, water and coastal zone management legislation, and several
land use proposals have been made relative to solid waste dis­
posal. As a result of the total environmer.tal implications of
this issue the Task Group on Land Use, consisting of two repre­
sentatives from each of the three environmental committees, was
established at the SWMC's request.
The group is to review the
question of land use with respect to possible implications on
CPI operations and to make appropriate recommendations to the
MCA Board for action.
During its organizational meeting the
Group concluded that, prior to developing recommendations for
MCA Board action, there is a definite need to ascertain current
CPI status with respect to all existing federal and regional
land use legislation.
Because of the legal nature of the activity,
MCA staff through the Joint Subcommittee on Environmental Law
(JSEL) or other legal source has been formally requested to
develop this information for the Task Group by July 1, 1976.
The Task Group will then develop its recommendations to MCA
by September, 1976.
The question of JSEL continuation, under review by the
Legal Advisory Committee for some time, has reportedly been
resolved in that JSEL will remain intact and function in a
manner yet to be defined. We have been assured by MCA staff
that legal assistance will be available upon request.
At
present at least two formal requests have been made to JSEL by
SWMC seeking legal assistance.
These include upcoming proposals
on solid waste legislation and the land use issue,
in order to
properly address these important issues it is imperative that
legal as well as technical expertise be readily available.
To
date, in keeping with past JSEL performance, we have not received
indication that consideration of our requests has been initiated.
If we are to effectively influence and combat unacceptable legis­
lative proposals, adequate legal assistance is a must.
With the exception of the JSEL question, some progress has
been made in improving internal MCA communications and organiza­
tional difficulties which were highlighted in the previous
two SWMC reports. As per recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee
on Environmental Affairs, two meetings have been held between
environmental committee chairmen and various MCA staff to discuss
MCA administrative procedures and methods by which MCA can act
in a more unified and timely fashion.
As a result of these
meetings several measures have been recommended to foster
improvement.
One of these provides for Government Relations
Department input into environmental committee meetings on a
continuing basis.
A member of the Government Relations staff
has been assigned to work with SWMC in liaison capacity.
This
in addition to the consistent and competent efforts of our
current Staff Secretary should be beneficial to SWMC activities.
To insure that a continuing dialogue is maintained among
all facets of MCA environmental affairs, I recommend that a
meeting of environmental committee members and appropriate MCA
staff be held annually to provide a forum for exchange and
coordination of information from all relevant sources, review
of MCA administration procedures and resolution of issues
involving more than one of the environmental committees.
In conclusion, SWMC is concerned with the ultimate disposal
of potentially hazardous wastes.
Of all the areas of environ­
mental control, ultimate disposal most readily reflects the need
for a total environmental control approach. We may see sig­
nificant successes in air and water pollution abatement processes.
But what has the CPI really accomplished if these successes are ~
negated because we are unable to dispose of the abatement process
residues or other potentially hazardous wastes in a technically
and economically feasible manner? We believe that, if the legal,
governmental and technical expertise which should be available
to us through MCA auspices can be combined into timely action,
we need not be the weak link in the chain of total environmental
control.
Dennis P. Bridge, Chairman
CMA 036921
Exhibit E
REPORT BY THE DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
WILLIAM M
STOVER
MAY 11, 1976
SENATE COMMITTEE WORKING ON TAX LEGISLATION
The Senate Finance Committee began markup of tax reform/tax
reduction legislation on April 27 and is expected to report some
type of tax measure by mid-June. Although it is not clear just
what the scope of the Committee's action will be, it is entirely '
possible that their bill will simply extend tax reduction pro­
visions which expire on June 30, thus delaying action on a tax
reform package until later in the year. Senator Russell Long,
Chairman of the Finance Conxnittee, has indicated that such a
course is a distinct possibility.
During the past two weeks of markup sessions the Senate
committee dealt primarily with tax shelters of little direct
interest to the chemical industry.
It is significant to note,
however, that most decisions could be characterized as easing
off on limitations or restrictions included in the House-passed
tax reform bill (H.R. 10612), Many observers are concluding
therefore that when the Conmictee takes up capital formation
and foreign income provisions, its actions will be generally
more favorable to industry than chat of the House.
However, there is still danger ahead. Whenever a tax bill
comes up for Senate floor action -- be it a simple extension of
expiring tax reduction provisions or a comprehensive tax reform/
tax reduction package -- Senator Kennedy and several other reformminded Senators are expected to introduce a number of anti-business
amendments. These are likely to include proposals to repeal de­
ferral of taxation of income of foreign subsidiaries, restrict
the use of the foreign tax credit, eliminate DISC entirely, repeal
the Asset Depreciation Range (ADR) System, and repeal the percen­
tage depletion allowance for hard minerals.
CMA 036987
The fate of these extreme amendments will depend on the
ability of the business community to convince a majority of
Senators of the damaging impact of the proposals on U. S.
business and the general economy.
This was emphasized yesterday by U. S. Senator Herman E.
Talmadge of Georgia, second-ranking Democrat on the Senate
Finance Committee.
In addressing MCA's CHEMICAL FORUM he urged
company officials to communicate their views on tax changes to
all Senators, and especially to those on the Finance Committee.
In order to stimulate savings and capital investment, Senator
Talmadge indicated that he favored proposals recommended by the
Administration and supported by MCA to make the 107. investment
tax credit permanent, to reduce the corporate tax rate, eliminate
double taxation of corporate profits and to modify the present
method of taxing capital gains. He fully supports retention of
the Foreign Tax Credit and DISC and firmly opposes any changes
that would materially alter and burden the competitive position
of our companies operating abroad.
It is his opinion that many
Members of the Finance Committee shared his views on these matters.
Various business organizations are urging industry spokesmen
to contact all Senators with whom they have constituent relations
to make known their views on these issues. We certainly support
this line of action, and believe that such contacts should be
made before June 15.
CLEAN AIR AMENDMENTS HIT SNAG IN SENATE
The Public Works Committees of both the House and Senate have
reported bills in what is the first attempt at comprehensive re­
vision of the Clean Air Act of 1970 (PL 91-604).
An emotional struggle is under way over provisions contained
in both bills intended to protect clean air against "significant
deterioration".
Both bills establish certain "mandatory" Class I
areas where only small amounts of additional pollution would be
allowed. The Committees say their non-deterioration proposals
would give states more control over the classification process
than do the EPA's present regulations.
Industry views this approach
as thinly disguised Federal land-use control.
CMA 036988
3
In the Senate, there are signs that support is growing for an
amendment proposed by Senator Frank Moss (D -Utah),
The Democratic
leadership has recently postponed until early June the floor de­
bate on Senator Muskie's bill, S
3219.
The Moss amendment would
defer the new nondeterioration restrictions for one year. During
that period, a National Commission on Air Quality, established in
the Senate bill, studies the economic and energy impacts of the
proposal and considers whether the government has enough technical
information to implement it
By late April, Senator Moss had gathered 12 co-sponsors -six Republicans and six Democrats. The hasty decision to postpone
floor action is being interpreted as an indication that his pro­
posal now has the backing to be adopted, and that opponents need
more time to solidify their opposition, MCA is therefore con­
tinuing to work to build support for the Moss amendment. We are
urging that member companies communicate with Senators on this
subject as soon as possible,
The House Interstate
pected to file the report
the next few days, There
the House might await the
and Foreign Commerce Committee is ex­
on its Air Quality Amendments bill within
now appears to be some possibility that
outcome of Senate action before proceeding.
THE SOLID WASTE UTILIZATION ACT -- WILL IT PASS7
The Senate Public Works Committee has scheduled markup on
proposed solid waste utilization legislation for May 12 and 13.
Last July, Committee Chairman Senator Jennings Randolph (D.-W,Va.)
introduced S, 2150, resulting from extensive hearings held during
1975.
Last Monday, May 10, the Committee staff issued a new
working print of the bill, which will now become the basis for
the markup.
The Hous* Interstate and Foreign Commerce Subcommittee on
Transportation and Commerce issued a draft solid waste bill last
December which was considerably more comprehensive than the orig­
inal Senate bill. We now understand that the Subcommittee has
abandoned the first draft because of adverse reactions, and that
another draft will emerge in mid-May which will be less contro­
versial and more likely to attract wide support. The Subcommittee
expects to hold hearings following issuance of the new draft bill.
CMA 036989
Last summer we submitted our own marked-up version of S. 2150
to the Senate Public Works Committee. We did the same with the
House Transportation and Commerce Subcommittee December draft.
In related developments, a House Government Operations Sub­
committee has conducted oversight hearings on solid waste, and
a House Science and Technology Subcommittee has held hearings on
several research and development bills related to solid waste and
resource recovery issues.
Oversight recommendations and R&D
legislative proposals will be given consideration and possible
incorporation by the Subcommittee on Transportation and Commerce
in its writing of the major House solid waste bill.
Judging from the events discussed above, and the general con­
sensus on Capitol Hill, there appears to be a good possibility of
new solid waste legislation this year.
OSHA OVERSIGHT HEARINGS
Hearings on worker exposure to toxic materials are scheduled
in the House Government Operations Manpower Subcomnittee this
Tuesday and Wednesday, May 11 and 12, and continuing May 19.
The Subcommittee plans to investigate the adequacy of OSHA
health standards, whether the procurement systems of GSA and DOD
include screening for toxic substances and subsequent worker noti­
fication, and whether dangerous chemicals in the workplace may be
more widespread than generally recognized.
Witnesses scheduled for Tuesday, May 11, include representa­
tives of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,
and OCAW (Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union). On May 12 the
Subcomnittee will hear Dr. Morton Corn, Assistant Secretary of Labor
for OSHA. Also appearing will be a spokesman for MCA, Mr. Emil E.
Christofano, Chairman of the MCA Occupational Health Committee.
Mr. Christofano is an Industrial Hygienist for Hercules Incorporated.
CMA 036990
Exhibit F
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
FOOD.
GARY A. SUNSHINE. CHAIRMAN
DRUG, AND COSMETIC CHEMICALS COMMITTEE
MAY 11,
1976
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to report to you
on the activities of the FDCC Committee and to share with you
thoughts that have grown out of my association with the work of
the Committee during the past year.
As you know, the objectives and the function of the FDCC
Committee are as follows:
"To advise thp Board of Directors concerning
chemicals used in foods, drugs, and cosmetics, and in
accord with Association policies and procedures,
develop positions on legislation and regulations affect­
ing such chemicals, formulate principles and encourage
technical development pertinent to their use and
cooperate with other organizations having parallel
interests
Considering the rapid rate of developments in the past few
years, these responsibilities represent no small task.
The activities
of the Committee during the past year have been directed largely
toward consolidating and implementing organizational improvements
initiated during the preceding year.
The organizational structure
that has been established consists essentially of a legislative and
regulatory subcommittee, a scientific subcommittee, and a commun­
ications subcommittee, which are designed to closely follow develop­
ments in their respective areas.
The subcommittees, through their
respective chairmen, and the steering subcommittee, function by
developing and referring well-developed reports and proposals to
the full Committee for review and action.
This structural concept
takes advantage of the available manpower by establishing a welldefined division of the work areas; eliminating repetitious meetings,
and concentrating on developing concrete proposals for the basis
of Committee action.
Task force units with specific areas of assign­
ment within these broad lines of division have also been used to
advantage.
CMA 036991
During the past year, for example, the Committee prepared
and submitted extensive comments on the FDA proposed Administrative
Practices and Procedures regulations,
of particular importance to
MCA was the FDA position stated in Section 2.23 (b) of these proposed
regulations, that any representation made by a trade association
"shall be on behalf of its members and shall constitute a represen­
tation on behalf of each member of the trade association, except
those specifically excluded by name in any such submission."
The
obstacles to equitable administration of justice under the law
that could be evoked by such a provision are so numerous as to preclude
detailed reference in this report.
Such objections have been fully
documented in our submission to FDA.
Other features of the proposed
regulations to which we have submitted substantial comments have
included a proposed limitation on the opportunity to present oral
testimony and to cross-examine witnesses during hearings, and the
establishment of criteria which the FDA asserted constituted a
proper basis on which to deny a petition or right to a hearing.
These provisions and others of varying degrees of importance and
impact are not merely a codification of existing FDA procedures, but
in many respects, represent a basic change in practices that restrict'
the rights of individuals subject to the agency's jurisdiction to
obtain consideration and review.
Another legislative development of importance which is now
under review by the legislative and regulatory subcommittee is the
Kennedy Food Surveillance Bill S.641.
Although originally heralded
as applying primarily to food manufacturing and processing establish­
ments, this proposed legislation has implications extending beyond
these areas.
Under the manufacturing sections, surveillance features
are included relating to the establishment of safety assurance pro­
cedures within plants, product coding, record keeping, and inspections.
In addition the Bill contains provisions for requiring registration
of food establishments.
However, in a broader context, the Bill
imposes obligations on food processors to immediately notify the
institution of a recall as well as the possibility that processed
foods "may be adulterated."
Citizens civil actions also are authorrized under the Bill.
Additionally, the Bill contains extensive
new requirements pertaining to the label identification of all
ingredients.
in addition to these activities, the Committee has also
monitored the NCI Carcinogenic Bioassay program, the FCC and FAO/WHO
monographs for food chemicals, and the FDA review of GRAS substances.
CMA 036992
These activities have been carried out primarily under the program
of the scientific subcommittee together with a number of other
projects relating to technical developments in the area of food,
drug, and cosmetic chemicals,
The development of proposed Good
Manufacturing Practices Guidelines for bulk drugs and food chemicals
is presently under study by this subcommittee.
In addition, technical
liaison is carried out with the activities of PMA, as they relate
to bulk drugs and with GMA, as they relate to food chemicals.
A project presently active within the communications sub­
committee is the development of a proposal for the formation of a
chemical industry information center.
Although the details of the
organization and operation of such a center and various considerations
relating to its establishment are not yet defined in concrete terms,
it is believed that such a center could help to improve the public's
understanding of questions and controversies that confront our
industry.
While the above describe briefly the broad spectrum of activ-,
ties that have been carried forward during the past year, a summary
of the Committee's activities would not be complete without an
appropriate evaluation of this work as it relates to the objectives of the Committee's responsibilities to MCA.
Such objectives clearly
must be understood in the light of the legislative and regulatory
climate that exists today.
Seen in this perspective, one can only
feel a keen sense of inadequacy — of constantly striving to barely
keep up with developments and the frustration of being able only to
superficially react to the various problems that continue to arise.
Despite the diligent efforts of restructuring the FDCC
Committee, it is believed that a more fundamental reevaluation of
the MCA activity in this area should be undertaken.
course, a variety of ways in which response to the greater burden
in this area of our activities can be made.
I would not propose as
part of this brief report to attempt to define in detail any partic­
ular solution.
It is appropriate, however, to recognize that the
time may have arrived whep the means which have served us well in
the past are no longer adequate to serve industries' needs in the
area of food, drug, and cosmetic chemicals.
MCA has always prided itself on the fact that committee leader­
ship and most of the working input comes from the member companies.
I suggest that this policy may no longer be appropriate in areas of
CMA 036993
fli
proliferating Legislation and regulation, such as food, drug and
cosmetic law.
These regulations are targeted at many areas,
frequently beyond the scope of interest of any single member company.
Therefore, I urge this Board to appoint a committee to study the
issue of from where should the leadership of any particular committee
come.
Should it be from the MCA staff, or should it continue to
come from the member companies.
The conclusion may not be the same
for all committees.
Nevertheless, X think this situation should
be given a fresh look.
I
f
CMA 036994
Exhibit G
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
GEORGE A. COFFENBERG, CHAIRMAN
TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
MAY 11, 1976
In ray initial report for the Transportation and Distribution Committee
on April 8 of last year, I restricted my comments to two items of major sig­
nificance having future impact on the chemical industry. A more detailed
report on the Committee's activities was appended to my remarks. Today my
oral report will focus on three topics and I refer you to the filed report
for the balance.
The chemical industry owns or operates approximately 67,000 tank cars
and is compensated by the railroads through a mileage allowance of from 11.071
to 23.814 per loaded car mile depending on the value of the car. The rail­
roads pay an allowance to suppliers of private rail cars in that freight rates
take into consideration a cost to the railroads of supplying cars. Prior to
1964, the allowance per mile was a one-level allowance. A car owner or opera­
tor was paid the same rate per mile irrespective of whether a car had a value
The chemical industry, having the newer and higher valued cars, was of
the opinion that the compensation paid by the railroads should recognize the
difference of investment in the cars and pay a higher allowance to the more
valuable cars than paid to cars of lower value. After long negotiations, a
tri-level system of compensation was established in November 1964. However,
because of disagreement among the railroads as to how the system was to w rk,
the matter was contested before the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) with
the car suppliers on one side and the railroads on the other.
Coomienclng in 1964 through May of this year, three major car compensa­
tion cases have been adjudicated before the ICC. In 1971, after a fav rable
ICC decision to an MCA complaint, the three-level system of compensation es­
tablished in 1964 was changed to a six-level system. However, the rates of
compensation to be paid by the railroads were frozen to car values established
in 1968. The final case, ICC Docket 35537 instituted by MCA over four years
ago, is about to be discontinued as a result of an interim agreement negotia­
ted between the litigants. The negotiations followed a favorable decision by
Division 2 for MCA* MCA's complaint was supported by. the American Petroleum *
Institute, the Corn Refiners Association, the Institute of Shortening and
Edible Oils, the major tank car leasing companies and Allied Chemical Corp ra­
tion.
The interim agreement accomplishes the following:
(1) The mileage rate for all six levels of compensation was
to be Increased on thirty days' notice by 22-1/2%. This
Increase became effective May 1, 1976. Tank car compen­
sation had not been increased since January 1, 1971. It
is estlmatad that the increase annualized will return to
the tank car perators an additional $40 million. The
chemical Industry's share is estimated at $20 million.
CMA 036996
Sin<.e 1964, the railroads only adjusted tank car compen­
sation upward afcer adjudication of a complaint before
the ICC. The agreement provides chat tank car compensa­
tion will be adjusted in relation to and at the time the
railroads adjust the compensation paid one another for
use of each other's cars. The railroads have increased
the compensation paid to each ocher four times, aggregat­
ing 45%, since the last time tank car compensation was
increased. We expecc the new rates of compensation,
effective May I, will again be increased in the first
quarter of 1977 when the railroads increase car compensa­
tion to each other.
New tank cars entering the rail fleet, frozen at 1968
valuations for the purpose of compensation, will now
enter the fleet at their fair market value. For example,
a car valued in 1976 dollars at $27,000 will call for a
mileage race of 23.814 per loaded mile whereas prior to
this agreement, such cars would have been adjusted by a
formula to a value of $18,500 and compensated at a rate
of 21.894. Existing cars will be re-evaluated and if the
fair markec value of the car places it in a higher mile­
age group, the car will be reassigned to the higher group.
Tank car owners and operators will support the establish­
ment of an equalization rule whereby, the railroads will
be compensated for excess empty miles when empty miles
exceed loaded miles by more than 105^.
The ICC will issue an order commencing a rule making
proceeding for the purpose of establishing rules and
methods for determining cank car compensation in the
future. When completed, the ICC will issue another or­
der canceling the interim agreement and prescribing the
basis on which tank car compensation is to be paid and
the mechanisms for its implementation. Rule making may
take as long as three years to complete.
In summary, we not only see the light at the end of the tunnel, but we
can see the end of the tunnel. During che next three years, complex and
difficult negotiating will be carried out with the railroads under ICC super­
vision. MCA's objective will be to do its best to assure that the rules
finally prescribed will provide equitable compensation for those who supply
tank cars.
last report dealt at length with Public Law 92-500, the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, and in particular, the 1972 amendments covering spills
of hazardous polluting substances and the civil penalties provided for such
spills in section 311. I advised that an ad hoc inter-Industry committee,
including MCA, was seeking legislative relief from the punitive provisions of
this section. H.R. 9560 was introduced September 11, 1975 to amend several
sections of the law and section 12 of the bill, while not totally to the lik­
ing of the ad hoc committee, would have been a vast improvement from the
existing law. MCA testified in support of the bill with caveats as to the
CMA 036996
meaning intended by certain language in the bill. MCA offered to work with
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the development of guidelines to
carry out the intent of cne dubious language along the lines of MCA's testi­
mony. EPA Administrator, Russell Train, testified in support of H.R. 9560,
including support of section 12. The desired revisions in the law, as en­
compassed in section 12, were recommended by the House Public Works Subcom­
mittee handling the bill.
However, in mark-up before the full House Committee on Public Works
and Transportation, the penalty language in section 12 underwent a significant
and unfortunate twist. The bill provided for a maximum penalty of $50,000.
In mark-up, to placate certain Committee members who were seeking to preserve
the maximum penalty of $5,000,000 when from a vessel and $500,000 when from a
shore-based facility, as provided in the 1972 amendments, the Committee ap­
proved a three-tier approach to penalties. The amendment, in effect provides
a maximum penalty of $50,000 for a first spill, a maximum of $100,000 for a
second spill, and a maximum of $500,000 for spills in excess of two during a
three-year period. The mark-up made no change in the language concerning
spills involving willful negligence or willful misconduct.
H.R. 9560 is expected to' obtain a rule from the Rules Committee for con­
sideration by the House some time this month, tt is the best judgment of
those who are familiar with legislative procedures that the mark-up committee
has made such a "Christmas Tree" of the bill, chat it stands a very good
chance of being voted down by the House. If this does not occur, because
S. 2710, the Senate's companion bill is so different than H.R. 9560, an ef­
fort will be made to return the penalty language to its original form during
the House and Senate conference. The fallback position will be to eliminate
section 12 in its entirety.
The transportation of hazardous materials continues to receive adverse
publicity far out of proportion to the safety its transportation record de­
serves. The Department of Transportation (DOT), through its Director of the
Office of Hazardous Materials when testifying on the Transportation Safety
Act of 1974, estimated that there are over two billion tons of hazsrdous
materials shipped annually with as many as 250,000 shipments tendered daily.
Major accidents involving hazardous materials have been relatively few when
considering the exposure, but each one raises new cries for increased regula­
tion.
Since 1968, the Department of Transportation has been attempting to
develop a new hazard information system integrating vehicle placards and
shipping papers with the ability for a quick emergency response. The DOT's
most recent effort is an advance notice of rule making identified Hazardous
Materials Docket No. 126. The XT requested that responses to the docket
evaluate nine hazard information systems proposed by respondents in a past
docket against nine criteria that a hazard Information system should meet.
MCA's response was a modification of its prior proposal and it is believed
more adequately meets the nine criteria than any of the other systems. It
integrates the vehicle placards, the shipping papers, an lnmediate ability
to respond, and CHEKTREC. The system is not only practical for implementa­
tion domestically including lntermodal transportation, but is readily adapt­
able for international shipments. We believe the MCA response is the lead­
ing candidate to be adopted by the DOT as a basis for a rule making proceed­
ing.
CMA 036997
M
- 4 The committee has a roster of thirty-six members and is organized
around eight standing subcommittees with the following areas of responsibility--hazardous materials, highway carriers, legislation, marine,
physical distribution, rail carriers, transportation environmental regula­
tions and a steering subcommittee. The steering subcommittee is comprised
of the other subcommittee chairmen and the committee officers.
Important matters currently involving the Transportation and Distribu­
tion Committee are:
I
Hazardous Materials Regulations. The hazard information (HI) system
proposed in HMR3 Docket No. 103; Notice 73-10, involved a two-digit
number for use on the vehicle placard and shipping paper as a key to
a response manual giving guidelines for an emergency response in the
event of a spill, leak or fire. DOT has discontinued HM-103 with
regard to the HI numbers. Simultaneously with the discontinuance of
part of HM-103, DOT instituted HM-126, and advance notice of rule
making inviting responses to evaluate nine HI systems received in
response to HM-103. MCA filed a timely response to HM-126 on
March 25, 1976. The revised MCA HI system filed is believed to meet
more closely the nine criteria against which each HI system is to be
evaluated than any other system.
1
Hazardous Materials Docket 127—Exemption Procedures. The Trans­
portation Safety Act of 1974 authorized the Secretary of Transp r-tation to grant exemptions from the Hazardous Materials Regulations'
similar to those formerly granted by DOT under the title of "Spe­
cial Permits." The rules and procedures for obtaining exemptions
became effective October 15 on conclusion of HM-127.
I
Prior to January 4, 1975, authority for the regulation of hazardous
materials was vested in each modal administrator (rail, highway,
water and air). Under the new Act, the Secretary has created the
Materials Transportation Bureau (MTB) with responsibility for the
operational functions of regulations, exemptions and compliance
with the Hazardous Materials Regulations. The MTB replaces the
Hazardous Materials Regulations Board (HMRB) which formerly c ordinated such matters.
Rail Carriers. Since April 1975, numerous freight rate dockets
substantially escalating charges for switching loaded and empty cars
appeared with little or no justification. MCA challenged these dock­
et*. and, in all but Isolated situations, the dockets were later
withdrawn by the carriers.
DOT Issued Emergency Order No. 5 requiring DOT Specifications 112A
and 114A, on uninsulated pressure tank cars containing flanmable
gases, to be shoved to rest, prohibiting humping or rolling switch­
es, as a result of railroad accidents In which such cars ruptured.
Through their freight rate dockets, the railroads proposed an arbi­
trary charge of from $100 to $300 per car per shipment for extra
handling. MCA challenged this arbitrary action and the carriers
later withdrew the proposal.
CMA 036998
5
III.
Highway.
ICC Docket MC-32155 (Sub.4) was an investigation under­
taken after petition by the National Tank Truck Carriers, Inc. to
identify, segregate and accumulate cost for the cleaning of cargo
tanks.
ICC accounting requirements did not make provision for such
segregation. MCA filed statements supporting the segregation and
identification of chose costs. The proceeding has been successfully
concluded.
National Classification Board Docket 744. Subject 40, proposed the
arbitrary reclassification of Class A and B poisons to 200 times
first class for LTL shipments and 100 times first class for truckload shipments regardless of the classification rating for a par­
ticular product. Challenged, this arbitrary action by the National
Classification Board has been placed in suspension by the Board and
is believed dead.
The Federal Government, as an offset to the truckers because of the
national maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour, authorised an
increase in the maximum weight for trucks on the Defense and Inter­
state Highway System from a gross weight of 73,280 to 80,000 pounds.
In order for vehicles to leave the Interstate System to pick up and
deliver freight, state weight limits must be increased allowing the
higher gross weight. The committee has recommended support for
state actions raising state weights to the interstate level.
Physical Distribution. At a one-day educational seminar preceding
the May Transportation and Distribution Committee meeting, MCA
member companies described the Interface of transportation informa­
tion with order entry and data base concepts. Several systems for
computerization of freight rates and routes were described.
During the October meeting, representatives of the National Tank
Truck Carriers, Inc. discussed service and economic problems
faced by the tank truck carrier industry. Arrangements are being
made to continue such dialogues with other major transportation
services at future meetings.
Marine. The development of regulations to implement the civil
penalties of section 311 of P.L. 92-500, the Federal Water Pol­
lution Control Act,has been monitored. Action seeking legisla­
tive relief from the punitive penalties of section 311 has not
been successful so far.
Environmental Regulations. The State of Illinois, through its
Pollution Control Board, has been considering, for seme time,
proposed toxic substances regulations. Transportation, in and
through the state, would have been seriously affected by the
proposed regulations. MCA participated in hearings opposing
inclusion of transportation in the regulations of the EPA.
The latest draft of the proposed regulations eliminates applica­
tion to transportation equipment.
CMA 036999
6
MCA and the National Tank Truck Carriers, Inc. have scheduled a
seminar on " Tank Truck Waste Water Effluents--Regulations and
Disposition" on June 10-11, 1976 at the University of Wisconsin
in Madison. Although the EPA currently has assigned a low
priority to waste water treatment discharged from transporta­
tion equipment, an understanding of the problems is being
sought through such meeting.
VII.
Legislative.
1975 was the year for transportation legislation.
In September, MIA testified on several bills bearing various
titles affecting the rail industry (H.R. 9802, S. 1876 and
S. 2718). The composite of legislation eventually became
S. 2718--"The Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform
Act of 1976." Several of the points made by MCA were adopted
in the legislation.
The Administration presently has before the Congress, a major
reform of the common and contract carrier regulatory system.
The legislation is termed the "Truck Regulatory Reform Act."
The T&D Conmittee has adopted positions with regard to princi­
ples Incorporated in the bill. To date, hearings have not been
scheduled. Meanwhile, meetings with framers of the bill in the
Department of Transportation have provided insight as to the
basis for the proposal and allowed explanation of chemical
industry reaction.
CMA 037000
Exhibit H
fry
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
BY
R. E. PHILLIPS, CHAIRMAN
TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT COMMITTEE
May 11, 1976
This report is on behalf of the MCA Transportation Equipment Committee.
i
The TEC needs no introduction but a review of its charter is useful. The Committee is
comprised of 25 representatives of member companies and handles technical and technically
related problems having to do with the transportation of chemicals by tank car, tank truck,
portable and intermodal tank, barge and bulk ship. To accomplish this task, three
standing subcommittees deal in the separata areas of rail, truck/portable tank, aid marine.
The chairmen of these groups are E. G. Hansen (duPont), V. H. Goodwin (Exxon) and
M. M. Anderson (Union Carbide) respectively. Our vice chairman is J. R. Hopkins (Dow).
We operate under rules of practice as by the MCA board approved.
To enhance our technical activit ies, we enjoy advisory support from individual tank car
engineers, and we have an associate member from the Bureau of Explosives. The TEC
chairman represents the MCA as a member of the AAR' Tank Car Committee. We have
a voice on the American National Standards Institute committee dealing with intermodal
containers and we have informal liaison with the National Tank Truck Carriers and
the Truck Trailer Manufacturers Association. Several of our Marine Subcommitte members
are active on the Coast Guard's Chemical Transportation Industry Advisory Committe .
Our most famous alumnus is J. T. Curtis, Jr. formerly of U. S. Steel and now Director of the
Materials Transportation Bureau of DOT.
Highlights of Current Activities
D. M. Long's report of Committee activites in May, last year, still applies in great measure.
We continue to devote significant activity to these items:
1
1. Tank car safety relief devices. Proposals are being processed for suggested
rulemaking concerning safety relief valves for tank cars carrying products
which should not be vented. Studies of safety vent materials are continuing.
2. We are following with interest the various tank car research programs which will
foster such innovations as thermal shielding, bottom outlet protection and
revised specifications for insulated tank can.
1
CMA 037001
3. The current’ tank truck and portable tank inspection requirements, (both domestic
and international) have been tabulated for the first time as a working document
for use in responding to anticipated regulatory revisions.
4. The success of our audio-visual training aid for pre-trip tank car inspection
has encouraged us to begin preparation of a similar program related to tank
trucks.
5. Our draft "Guidelines for Prevention and Control of Chemical Spills in Bulk
Rail and Highway Transportation" is in the final review stage befor presentation
to the Association for publication.
6. Several regulatory proposals in the marine area continue to require our attention,
including taikerman regulations, barge fleeting requirements, end developments
on manned vessel rulemaking.
7. We are concerned with the Environmental Protection Agency's hazardous
materials spills proposals and are contributing to the Associations' response.
8. DOT Docket HM 112 was finalized last month. This consolidation of the hazardous
materials regulations adopted several of MCA's recommendations. Certain areas,
such as the classification of poisons were put In abeyance and will require our
continued study.
Items for Future Consideration
Many of our "current" activities are "in anticipation" of future problems:
1. Recommend unloading hose requaiificatfon procedures are being developed.
2. We have actively participated in the development of proposals for a hazard
information system.
3. Possible revocation of visual inspection procedures for tank trucks is a matter on
which the Committee Is developing a position.
4. There is a possibility that the environmental effect of chemical spills may be a
matter for additional classification of commodities.
CMA 037002
The n w Material* Tramp rtation Bureau has revised the procedures for btaining exemptions
from the regulations. It is now necessary to provide full container and commodity data and
experience along with justification vd safety analyses to obtain exemptions for haidling
chemicals or containers not now included in the regulations.
The Transportation Equipment Committee will continue its efforts toward safety In the hcndling
and shipping of the industry's products, both by attention to the specific areas ennumerated and
to others as the need develops.
4
CMA 037003
Exhibit F
REPORT BY THE DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
WILLIAM M. STOVER
SEPTEMBER 14, 1976
CONGRESS NEARS ADJOURNMENT AMID GROWING ELECTION FEVER
Leaders of both the House and Senate continue to aim for
October 2 adjournment of the 94th Congress. Despite the fact
that both houses appear on schedule, some observers are
skeptical since Congress rately meets deadlines for ending
its work.
Not only are the remaining days few in number, but thoughts
of the November election are proving increasingly distracting
. to Members. A number of Congressmen have already gone home to
campaign and attendance problems could cause difficulty for
party leaders in these closing weeks as they attempt to complete
* remaining legislation.
The final days before adjournment are always a difficult
and uncertain period for Congress and for those who follow its
activities closely.
Time pressures and distractions lead to
hasty action in some cases and the legislative process becomes
all the more unpredictable.
Nonetheless, it is possible to speak with assurance on the
fate of several important bills which have received our attention
in recent months:
- the patent reform bill, earlier passed in objectionable
form by the Senate, will die in the House Judiciary
Committee;
- oil divestiture legislation never really got off the
ground but is certain to prove controversial in 1977.
- the bill providing for deregulation of natural gas is
stalled.
CMA 037038
2
On the other hand, passage appears likely for the Air
Quality Act Amendments, and for a Toxic Substances Control bill.
THE "PARENS PATRIAE" BILL IS STILL ALIVE
A major anti-trust reform bill continues to move through
the Congress.
The Senate last week passed a very tough and
controversial version.
As a result, parliamentary maneuvering
is underway as opponents seek to block passage by the House.
The major provisions of the legislation are:
- expanded investigative authority for the Department of
Justice and the Federal Trade Commission;
- requirement for pre-merger notification of Justice and
FTC where companies fit certain trigger guidelines, thus
giving the Government the opportunity to block intended
mergers;
- the controversial "parens patriae" section, allowing
state attorneys general to bring treble-damages classaction suits against businesses on behalf of the state's
citizens.
WATER QUALITY AMENDMENTS NEARING CONFERENCE
House and Senate conferees will soon meet to determine the
fate of a bill amending the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
in several significant respects. Major point of contention will
be the wording of the wetlands section - that is, how to control
pollution resulting from dredge and fill operations in wetlands,
lakes and streams.
Other provisions:
- construction grants for municipal sewage treatment plants;
- funding for EPA aid in the form of loan guarantees for
cities' shares of Federally-funded sewage treatment projects;
- modification of deadlines within which public treatment
plants must meet requirements.
CMA 037039
r
The wetlands pollution controversy arises as a result of
regulations written by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to
the original Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (92-500).
A 1975 court ruling held that these regulations apply to all
waters of the U. S. and not just those defined as navigable
under the law.
Staff members of the House and Senate Public Works Committees
have been meeting in an effort to find a basis for compromise.
Regardless of the outcome, the next Congress will be con­
ducting an in-depth review of PL 92-500 and the report of the
president's Commission on Water Quality. MCA expects to take
an active role in those deliberations and our preparations are
already underway.
ENACTMENT SEEMS LIKELY FOR SOLID WASTE LEGISLATION
The Senate calls it "solid waste utilization" while the
House refers to it as "resource conservation and recovery", but
whatever the name, a new solid waste law appears to be in
prospect.
M
The Senate passed S. 2150 last June in a generally acceptable
form,
in recent months the House Interstate and Foreign Commerce
Committee has been at work on several versions of its own.
Subcommittee draft language was circulated for comment and a
number of helpful changes incorporated.
The Committee bill has
now been cleared for House floor consideration next week.
It
appears unlikely that the House/Senate conference will encounter
substantial difficulty and enactment appears to be a good bet.
Industry appears favorably inclined toward both bills.
The major provisions:
- mandatory Federal standards on hazardous waste, including
its generation, transport, storage and disposal? EPA may
delegate implementation to the states;
- EPA guidelines for state solid waste management plans,
with grants and technical aid handled through a new
Office of Discarded Materials;
- substantial EPA research and development programs aimed
at small-scale and low-technology systems, sludge
management, reducing air quality problems from incineration,
and energy recovery;
CMA 037040
4
- study programs in eleven specified areas including
plastics recovery, energy recovery, sludge reduction,
and waste reduction.
OUTLOOK FAVORABLE FOR MASSIVE TAX REFORM BILL
It has taken two years, over a thousand pages of text, and
two weeks of intensive House/Senate conferences, but the massive
tax reform bill is finally near enactment.
It must be considered
the most significant tax bill since 1969 since it impacts the
taxation of every individual and corporation in the United
States.
The bill extends through next year, although in somewhat
different form, the anti-recession tax cuts voted last year by
the Congress.
It places higher taxes on upper-bracket taxpayers
through increased minimum taxes and reduction of "tax shelters".
It alters treatment of estate and gift taxes, deductions for the
use of private homes in business, deductions for vacation homes,
and individual retirement accounts.
Especially significant is the fact that the bill raises
approximately $1.6 billion in revenue for the next fiscal year.
This was essentially the target of the House bill and of both
the Senate and House Budget Committees.
The bill is therefore
regarded as something of a victory for House Ways and Means.
Committee Chairman A1 Ullman (D-Ore.), and for the new Congressional
budget-setting process itself.
To refresh your memory, the Tax Reform Act passed the House
in December 1975 and in the Spring underwent hearings in the
Senate Finance Committee for about two months. Mr. F. Perry
Wilson testified on behalf of MCA, urging adoption of provisions
which would encourage capital investment and opposing changes in
tax provisions related to foreign operations of U. S. companies.
The Committee completed mark-up of its bill in mid-June and
the Senate floor debate began later that month. A bi-partisan
coalition of moderates, led by Senator Russell Long, held off
the efforts of "reformers" to add a variety of anti-business
amendments.
The Senate passed the measure in early August.
Last
week House and Senate conferees reached agreement on all pro­
visions.
j
The conference compromise contains the following items of
interest to our industry:
CMA 037041
I
5
canital Formation and Corporate Tax Rates
The investment tax credit is extended for 4 years
Corporate tax rates are set at 20% on the first
above $50,000.
These levels are extended through
1977.
Taxpayers who are now allowed a 3-year carryback
and a 5-year carryforward of net operating losses
will receive an additional two years to write off
their losses.
The minimum tax rate for corporations is increased
The 6-month holding period for long-term capital
gains is increased to 9 months in 1977, and to one
year in 1978.
Foreign Source Income
DISC benefits are applicable to that increment of
export gross receipts which exceed 67% of base
period gross receipts. The base period will be
taxable years 1972 to 1975.
Illegal payments to foreign officials may not be
deducted, do not reduce earnings and profits, and
are deemed immediately repatriated for tax purposes.
Companies complying or cooperating with international
boycotts are denied the foreign tax credit, deferral
and DISC benefits on that portion of their income
related to the boycott.
The provision would not
apply to boycotts approved or agreed to by the U. S.
The earned income abroad exclusion is reduced to
The conferees agreed to remove energy tax provisions from
the tax reform bill, preferring to handle this area separately.
In a last minute change, they included state tax reform provisions.
CM* 057042
Exhibit G
REPORT TO BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
Fletcher L. Byrom, Chairman
Economic Policy Review committee
September 14,
1976
The Economic Outlook
There is some concern by many in industry that July and August
have been more than the normal doldrums of summer.
Certainly, many
areas have been fitful at best.
On the other hand, early August
sales in major retail chains have evidenced encouraging strength.
The real nagging concern is the lack of any strength in the housing
market and no signs yet of any major move in plant and equipment
expenditures.
Inflationary pressures are at least passive for the present.
But again, projections of shortages in primary industry, with only
slight increases in capacity utilization due to the lack of new
capacity installations in recent years, are a cause for real
concern to many.
The question of where eight million college students will get
jobs and what their reactions will be if they do not find the kind
of employment to which they feel they are entitled? the continuing
decapitalization of primary capital-intensive industry due to
inadequate depreciation policy and the failure to date of much of
industry to reduce its dividend-payout ratios in order to compensate
for the shortfall in depreciation; the inability to economically
justify new plant expenditures on the basis of present profit
levels — all these concerns hang like a heavy cloud over a recovery
which to many is not as buoyant as they might have hoped, admitting
that to others the lack of boom conditions is a good sign for a
lengthy recovery period.
Add to this the voiced concern of the believers in the
Kondratieff long-wave cycle theory and you tend to join Tillich
when he said "we must learn to be comfortable with ambiguity".
Wage and Price Controls
CMA 037043
Wage and price controls continue in effect in Canada, so that
Canadian member companies of MCA as well as US member companies
ln their Canadian operations face problems similar to those which
confronted US industry during the 1971-1974 period.
Here in the United States, the Council on Wage and Price
Stability continues to focus attention on situations it regards as
inflationary. However, while it does have subpoena power, it has
no enforcement authority.
In view of the solid opposition of both
business and labor, there is no present likelihood of the renewed
imposition of mandatory wage and price controls.
3. The Hart Bills
Senator Hart of Michigan three years ago introduced a bill
titled "The Industrial Reorganization Act" and last year rein­
troduced a slightly revised version.
The bill was intended to
facilitate the splitting of companies in a number of named industries
into smaller units, provided that certain arbitrary arithmetical
measures indicate the existence of "economic concentration" in the
given industry. The chemical industry was one of seven listed as a
possible target.
This bill was formally abandoned by Senator Hart on May 13
this year. He conceded that its enactment was not "politically
feasible...in the foreseeable future." He then introduced a more
modest Monopolization Reform Act (S. 3429).
It would amend the
Sherman Anti-Trust Act in four respects:
it would eliminate any requirement of proof of intent
to monopolize in actions brought by the United States;
it would eliminate superior performance as a defense
to actions brought by the United States;
(3) it would eliminate the prima facie effect of a Government
judgment in such an action for subsequent private triple
damages;
it would allow courts to take into consideration economics
of scale in fashioning remedies.
No action is expected this year on this new Hart bill, and
indeed (in view of Senator Hart's decision not to seek re-election)
its future is dubious.
When the Hart Industrial Reorganization Act' was first introduced
MCA (in order to be prepared for all contingencies), engaged an
economic consultant. Professor Steven Lustgarten of Baruch College,
CMA 037044
r
City University of New York, to assist in preparing the chemical in­
dustry's case.
His report, "An Analysis of the Chemical Industry in
view of the Proposals for Deconcentration," has been completed and
is available. While Senator Hart's Judiciary Subcommittee on Anti­
trust and Monopoly did not in fact hold any hearings on the chemical
industry, the Lustgarten report should be helpful in case Congress
in the future should turn its attention to our industry.
4. Divestiture in the Oil industry
es
i
Since the energy crisis initiated by the Arab oil boycott in
1973, there has been growing pressure inside Congress and outside
for divestiture in the oil industry - vertical divestiture, limiting
oil companies to one or two of the four basic functions of the in­
dustry (production, transportation, refining, and marketing) and
horizontal divestiture, requiring oil and gas producers to divest
their interests in other energy sources (coal, uranium, oil shale,
By a vote of 8 to 7, the Senate Judiciary Committee has reported
out S, 2387, a vertical divestiture bill.
It would require the 18
largest oil companies to divest themselves of vertically integrated
holdings within five years. No further action is expected on the
bill this year.
The Administration opposes it.
On the whole.
Democratic Presidential nominee Carter inclines against vertical
divestiture, although he seems to favor horizontal divestiture.
The Economic Policy Review Committee has recommended that MCA
oppos
"legislative divestiture and/or divorcement of the oil in­
dustry and ...similar Congressional efforts in other major indus­
5. Federal Chartering of Corporations
A series of Senate Commerce Committee hearings, chaired by
Senator Hartke, were held early this summer on the issues of corporat responsibility/federal chartering, offering Ralph Nader a
forum in which to push his advocacy of federal chartering for
larger corporations, a favorite cause of his. However, with both
the Ford Administration and Democratic Presidential nominee Carter
in opposition to this, it appears unlikely to get anywhere for the
time being.
The Economic Policy Review Committee will continue to
monitor any developments in this area.
6. Economic Planning Task Force
CMA0ST046
A task force, h aded by Harold Passer of Eastman Kodak, has
been organized to review the various proposals in the area of eco­
nomic planning being mooted in the Congress and elsewhere.
It
will hold its first meeting September 15.
7. Multinational Corporations
The Economic Policy Review Committee is represented by two
members on a special MCA task force dealing with the problems
facing multinational corporations.
Other MCA Committees represented
are Tax Policy, International Trade, Government Relations, and
Public Relations.
Multinational corporations are under study and/or attack
in a number of international and national forums.
There is the
UN Commission on Transnational Corporations, with a related UN
information and research center.
There is the International Labor
Organization (ILO), which is conducting a study on the social impact
of multinational corporations.
There is the Organization of American
There is the UN Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), where the Third World nations rally for their attack upon
And there is, most constructively from the point of view of
industry, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
At home, the most important forums are Senator Church's Sub­
committee on Multinational Corporations and the tax-writing Com­
mittees of the Congress - Ways and Means in the House and Finance
in the Senate.
The task force has been monitoring developments in all these
forums.
Thanks to an effective industry educational campaign, the
drive for punitive taxation of MNC's was largely turned back in
the House Ways and Means and Senate Finance Committees.
The most
dynamite-packed issue, however, is that of payoffs abroad.
The
Administration is sponsoring a bill calling, in effect, for dis­
closure, while a bill approved by the Senate Banking Committee
would outlaw such payments.
Multinational corporations got off reasonably well at the
annual meeting of the ILO this summer.
The UN Commission on
Transnational Corporations is at work on guidelines, but is not
scheduled to produce them for eighteen months or so.
By far the most important recent development on the interi
national stage was the adoption by the OECD on June 21 of a
statement on "International Investment and Multinational Enterprises."!
CMA 037046
This statement, the product of lengthy negotiations among the 24
industrialized nations represented in the OECD, sets forth sound
voluntary standards for business conduct throughout the world and
includes many of the principles long endorsed by MCA member companies
operating internationally.
In particular, the statement:
* Provides for national treatment of enterprises owned by
foreign investors, so that they will be accorded treatment no
less favorable than that accorded domestic enterprises in like
situations;
* Recognizes the sanctity of contracts between governments and
enterprises;
* Recognizes the positive contributions which multinational
enterprises can make to world economic and social progress;
* Encourages the use of international arbitration in resolving
disputes between governments and enterprises.
The OECD statement is not only important in itself, but should
enable the industrial nations to take a unified and constructive
posture as the debate over multinational corporations progresses in
the wider forum of the United Nations.
CMA 037047
Exhibit H
REPORT TO BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
Ronald S. Wishart, Jr.f Chairman
Energy Conservation Committee
September 14,
1976
This is the first report of the Energy Conservation Committee,
established by the Board of Directors at its November 1975 meeting.
Up to that date, and beginning in October 1974, an ad hoc committee
had dealt with energy conservation matters.
From October 1974
onward, the Committee has maintained, where legally feasible; a
close liaison and active cooperation with the Department of Comm rce and with the FEA and its contractors.
Since its establishment,
two major responsibilities:
the Committee has been dealing with
1. Supervising the ongoing voluntary program of twice-yearly
reports on energy conservation to the Department of Commerce and
the F deral Energy Administration.
As of the preparation of this
report, the most recent energy conservation report was that submitt d in April 7 of this year, in which 107 MCA member companies
participated.
The report showed energy conservation for the
calendar year 1975 as 4.0% per unit of output, compared with 1972
as a base year.
Without the energy costs of OSHA and environmental
regulations in effect in 1975 but not in 1972, the energy conserva­
tion rate would have been 4.9%.
An over-riding reason for the
relative modesty of these figures was that, due to the recession,
our industry was operating at only 74.2% of capacity in 1975, com­
pared with 83.5% in 1972.
There are very few major MCA member companies not taking part
in MCA's energy reporting program or those of other relevant associ­
ations, such as the Fertilizer Institute and the Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Association.
These few companies have been individually
contacted, and will hopefully be taking part in the next report to
the two Federal agencies, due in mid-September.
This voluntary program is the result of^an October 1974
meeting between top Commerce Department and FEA officials and top
officials of some 28 major chemical companies, all MCA members.
At
this meeting, there was agr ement on a consensus energy conservation
goal of 15% per unit of output by calendar 1980 as compared with
CMA 037048
calendar
1972.
2. Since December 1975, when the President signed into law
the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, the Committee has been
seeking to cope with the new industrial energy conservation pro­
visions which are part of this Act.
The Act focuses on the ten leading energy-consuming industries
by two-digit SIC codes, officially identified early this year.
Not
surprisingly, our industry (SIC 28) ranks first.
For each of these top 10 industries, FEA is to set an energy
conservation goal, replacing the consensus goals under which many
industries, including ours, have been operating.
FEA has contracted
with outside consultants to study each of the ten industries and
propose goals - which, of course, FEA can accept or modify.
Because of the complexity of the chemical industry, FEA
initially had difficulty getting an appropriate contractor to take
on the job.
However, thanks in part to MCA's interest in having a
qualified contractor take on this responsibility, Battelle Memorial
Institute finally undertook it, with Chem Systems as subcontractor
The engineering and technical subcommittee of the Energy Conservation
Committee worked closely with the contractors, aiding them individually
and collectively in their demanding task, and contributing their ex­
pertise in methodology.
The contractors have submitted their .report,
and it will be published in the FEDERAL REGISTER in late September,
with public hearings in October.
It is quite possible that consumer and environmental groups may
testify in opposition to any proposed reasonable target for our
industry, so MCA must be prepared to testify in its own behalf.
Internal studies carried on by the Committee indicate that the in­
dustry can meet a target in the neighborhood of 15%.
In further conformity with EPCA requirements, FEA must identify
the top energy-consuming companies in each of the ten already-iden­
tified industries - either the 50 highest-ranking companies or
those using over a trillion BTU's in energy per year, whichever
number is smaller.
Some 60 companies reporting through MCA have
listed energy purchases of over a trillion BTU's a year, and there
may be other such companies reporting through the Fertilizer
Institute, etc.
It therefore seems likely that the cut-off point
for chemical companies will be somewhat over a trillion BTU's per
CMA 037049
r
Under EPCA provisions and regulations, companies reporting
through industry programs such as MCA's may be exempted from indi­
vidual reporting, even if it would otherwise be required of them.
The criteria for acceptable industry programs will be published in
the FEDERAL REGISTER.
However, because FEA is falling behind its
EPCA timetable, there remains a 50/50 chance that companies may
have to file at least one mandatory individual report in early 1977.
Another section of EPCA provides for the encouragement and
subsidy of state energy programs.
Here MCA's prime interest is in
exempting major industries like ours from reporting to the various
states, since they already report to Federal agencies.
If, however,
some states insist upon industrial energy conservation reporting,
w would urge them to adopt the same system already in effect for
Federal reporting.
After monitoring two regional hearings on
state programs, MCA testified to this effect at the plenary
hearing in Washington in July.
Another area of FEA concern outside of EPCA is its program
to promote fuel conversion from oil and gas to coal.
The future
issues subcommittee of the Energy Conservation Committee has mon-itored the questionnaires to be sent out to companies in this area,
and has made recommendations which have been persuasively relayed
to FEA through a task force of the Industrial Energy Users Forum.
~ A genuine success was realized in modifying some unreasonable re­
quests - e.g. obtrusive financial questions in the Major FuelBurning installation questionnaire.
The Energy Conservation Committee has four subcommittees:
engineering and technical? state relations; fuel types; and future
issues.
It has also established fruitful liaison with three other
MCA standing Committees: Government Relations, Legal Advisory, and
Public Relations.
Government Relations contacts have been useful in dealing with
legislation going through the Congress concerned in one way or
another with energy conservation.
Public Relations have helped in
the explanation of the effect on energy conservation of the
relatively low capacity at which the industry was functioning in
calendar 1975 - and our presentation in this regard was welcomed
by the Department of Commerce and the Federal Energy Administration
as supportiv
of their reports to the public.
Furthermore, Public
Relations ass mbled and distributed internal and external publica­
tions by m mber companies designed to promote energy conservation.
We shall look to Legal Advisory liaison for advice in preparing
testimony for the various public hearings which will be scheduled
as part of the EPCA program.
CMA 037050
Appendix to Exhibit H
APPENDIX - ENERGY SITUATION UPDATE
TOTAL ENERGY
Total energy demand declined,
over the period 1973-75.
During the first half of 1976 energy
demand increased sharply and the year-end demand is expected to
near 1973 levels.
Post-1976 energy demand is projected to grow
OIL
Oil products demand declined from 17.3 to 16.6 MM B/D (-3.0% AAI)
during 1973-75.
During the first half of 1976 oil products
demand increased sharply, nearing the 1973 levels.
Domestic crude oil production declined at about -4% AAI (1973-75),
although the first half of 1976 showed a slowing of this decline.
Imports (crude oil and products) reached a record level near
first half of 1976 and are expected to approach 10 to 11
‘ North Slope crude oil is expected to provide about 2 MM B/D. by
the early 1980's and reverse the decline in domestic production
through the 1980's.
' The Trans-Alaskan pipeline is about a month behind schedule and
completion could be delayed even further due to welding defects
(current target completion date is December, 1976).
Outer Continental Shelf lease sales have been held for Alaska,
California, and Atlantic (the development schedule for these
leases is undecided).
The Energy Policy and Conservation Act (December 22, 1975)
established a new crude oil pricing mechanism (initial crude
oil price rollback plus maximum 10%/year price increases) and
required review of oil product price decontrol Qto date,
residual fuel oil, distillates, naphthas (except SNG plant
feedstock) and gas oils have been decontrolled^].
EPCA required
PEA to develop a plan for the maintenance and storage (equiva­
lent of 3 months of imports) of readily available inventories
of crude and products for use during energy shortages.
EPCA
also established efficiency standards for automobiles and ef­
ficiency targets for major appliances and major industries.
oil equivalent barrels per day.
2) Average Annual Increase
CMA 037051
NATURAL GAS
Domestic production continued to decline (-6.3% AAI 1973/75)
with 1976 production estimated at about 19 trillion cubic
feet.
No reversal of the downward trend is expected through
1985.
A new pricing program was recently proposed by FPC for
escalating the price of three "new" gas (post-1/1/73) classifi­
cations.
This program is currently subject to litigation and
possible congressional legislation.
Classification III new
gas (sale to interstate commerce initiated on or after 1/1/75)
is raised from about $0.52/Mcf. to $1.42/Mcf. and escalated at
$0.01/Mcf./quarter starting 10/1/76.
COAL
Production has increased at about 3 to 4% AAI since 1973 with
1976 production estimated at about 660 MM tons.
Interior's freeze
on coal leasing in the western states is expected to be lifted
early in 1977; however, FEA's objective of doubling coal produc­
tion by 1985 is considered optimistic.
Related developments;
Sierra Club vs. Kleppe suit has been
settled - no extended regional impact statement is required;
Coal Leasing Act has been enacted over Presidential veto sets rules for leasing federal lands; interior Department surface
mine reclamation rules have been established; proposed federal
strip mining legislation has been vetoed twice in the last two
years.
ELECTRIC UTILITIES
Electricity sales, which grew at about 7.5% AAI (1973/75) leveled
off during 1974, increased about 2% in 1975 and showed about a
5% gain during the first half of 1976.
Post-1976 sales growth
FEA coal burning orders are now in effect for 30 of the 74 ,new
power plants earlier designated by FEA for coal burning facili­
ties.
Besides the remaining 44 new power plants an additional
48 new power plants have also been designated for coal burning
facilities.
During 1975,74 existing power plants were issued
orders to convert to coal.
Nuclear electricity generation reached about 9% of total genera­
tion during the first half of 1976 and is expected to increase
to about 30% by 1985.
Court rulings held that:
the environmental effects of the
complete nuclear fuel cycle should be considered in individual
license applications (concerned the Vermont Yankee Plant - in
operation since 1972); and, energy conservation should be con­
sidered as an alternate to building a nuclear plant.
CMA 037052
T.pgisIation was recently enacted in California which requires
an extensive study of nuclear power plant feasibility and
poses further delays for new nuclear plants in that state.
Although the California anti-nuclear initiative did not pass,
at least five other states have similar initiatives on the
November ballot.
AMENDMENTS TO THE OT.EAN ATR AOT
No-significant deterioration of air quality regulations published
by EPA were upheld by a recent court decision and Congress is
seeking to establish its own standards.
New amendments to the Act have been passed by the Senate and the
House is currently debating their version.
Both bills include:
tightening of the no-significant deterioration requirements for
"clean" areas; some relaxation of the automotive emission
standards; compliance date extensions for industrial and utilities
emission sources; and, additional controls for "polluted" areas.
ENERGY TECHNOLOGY
ERDA has developed a National Plan for multi-billion dollar
development and commercialization of new technologies (enhanced
oil and gas recovery, oil shale, geothermal, solar, nuclear,
synthetic fuels...) and conservation (energy efficiency)
technologies.
INTERNATIONAL
World crude prices remain steady with the decision by OPEC
members in May to postpone further price increases; however,
some price increases may be forthcoming after the December, '1976
meeting.
The International Energy Agency has just approved a detailed
guide for sharing all available oil in case of a new oil embargo.
To reduce its members* dependence on foreign oil, IEA also has
a long-range program which includes:
tough conservation policies,
incentives such as guaranteed minimum prices to stimulate other,
indigenous energy resources, and stepped up research on new energy
sources such as solar power, hydrogen, and fusion.
OPEC production increased from 27.1 MM B/D in 1975 to 28.2 MM B/D
during the first quarter of 1976 which reduced shut-in capacity
CMA 037063
Exhibit I
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
John B. Clark, Chairman
Patent and Trademark Committee
September 14,
1976
you will recall that it is the responsibility of the Patent
nd Trademark Committee to maintain an awareness of new developments
in the industrial property field having present or prospective impact
on the chemical industry; to determine MCA positions where warranted,
and to act either directly or through the Board of Directors, as is
appr0priate, in making MCA viewpoints known.
Last October I had the opportunity to report to you on the
status of patent legislation in the Congress.
You will recall it was
predicted that S-2255 would be passed by the Senate and forwarded to
^he House for their consideration.
You will also recall that in the
Hkinion of your Patent Committee, S-2255 is an ill-conceived piece of
legislation which will have a serious negative impact on the value
of the patent system.
S-2255 was passed by the Senate and sent to the House with
little substantive amendment despite serious efforts by MCA and others
, to modify and improve objectionable sections.
As of today, it appears
unlikely that the House subcommittee responsible for patent legislation
will get to 'S-2255 this year, and as a result, it will die with this
Congress.
While this is welcome news in that it maintains the status
quo for the time being, we can very likely expect renewed activity
next year.
I should note that several changes are needed to improve the
patent system, and that the most important of these — a system for
the re-examination of patents — is the subject of another bill
sponsored by Rep. Wiggins of California.
Rep. Wiggins is minority
leader of the House subcommittee concerned with patent legislation
and he appears to be concerned with preserving and strengthening the
patent system.
Our Committee is prepared to continue to assist in the
development of constructive changes in the law and its primary efforts
wil1 continue to be geared in this direction.
I wish to speak briefly about what is happening in the inter^^ional area, but before proceeding in that direction, I should note
at
Patent Committee has also provided comments to ERDA on a
^ patent policy.
Basically, we recommended a policy designed
attract participation in Government-sponsored research by companies
CMA 037054
with a background and experience in the energy field.
To this end,
we urged adoption of a policy which would provide a flexible approach
to ownership of patents resulting from Government-sponsored R&D, and wh
would permit the Government Administrator to grant exclusive or
partially exclusive licenses to energy inventors where title is vested
in the Government.
To proceed now with developments in the international area,
you are all aware of the changing attitudes of many of the Developing
Countries,
in the industrial property and technology transfer areas,
this has resulted in new laws in Mexico and other South American
J
countries, a proposed new law in Canada, and a great deal of activity
in various U.N. agencies and the Organization of American States, etc. !
Since a number of MCA member companies are concerned with these changes,
we are seeking to define the part MCA should play in this connection.
While to date our activity has been limited, we have been consulted
by and have provided our comments to the U.S. Government negotiators
with regard to efforts by Developing Countries to change the Paris
Convention on patents and trademarks.
In addition, and in response to ;
notification of a proposed negative change in the patent law of
Taiwan affecting the chemical industry, an Ad Hoc Group of Patent
Committee members, together with the U.S. Assistant Commissioner of
Patents, were invited to meet with the Taiwanese Minister of Economic
Affairs to assist him in understanding the economic consequences of whai
they were proposing to do.
This meeting was held and it appeared to
those present that they achieved a substantial portion of our objective!
and that the proposed change will be moderated.
We will gain a better
feel for this as we experience Patent Office decisions in the future.
j
On another front, Canada is proposing a number of radical
changes to their patent law, which, if accepted, would substantially
reduce the attractiveness of seeking patents in Canada.
Commissioner of Patents, together with a small industry group, has
been invited by the authors of the proposed changes to meet with them
to discuss the ramifications of adoption.
While this is not solely
an MCA Patent Coirmittee activity, we are heavily represented.
The
delegation is intended to be a cross-section of U.S. industry, and in
addition to MCA members DuPont, Phillips, Merck, and Monsanto, both
IBM and G.E. will participate.
The meeting is scheduled for October 21
and preparations are in full swing.
Finally, it is my strong feeling that MCA must continue to
play a role ex-U.S. and we will be attempting to define this role
more clearly in the coming year.
CMA 037055
Exhibit B
PROPOSED PROJECT
ON
HYDROCARBON EMISSION CONTROL COST ANALYSIS
The Air Quality Committee recommends MCA engage an inde­
pendent contractor to conduct a study of the cost of control­
ling emissions to the unprecedented new low levels being
planned by the Environmental Protection Agency.
The Committee
further recommends the study, requiring 8-10 months at a pro­
posed cost of $95,500, be assigned to Foster D. Snell.
Some member company ®timates place the new permanent in­
vestment cost at $5 billion to $15 billion for reducing an es­
timated 2 million tons per year of hydrocarbon emissions to the
new levels. Annual operating and maintenance costs would be in
Draft EPA guideline documents
indicate estimates of control costs at much lower levels.
The
critical nature of the contemplated reductions can be appreci­
ated from realizing that 15 lbs/day may be the maximum allowed,
whereas 300 lbs/day now are permitted in most circumstances.
The study has been designed to ascertain how much it will
cost, using reasonably available control technology (RACT), to
reach four levels of hourly emission rates and four levels of
daily rate limits.
The study will yield data necessary to es­
tablish the relevant cost-benefit correlations needed to define
the crucial point of diminishing return and the cost effectiv ness of at least four basic RACT methods.
Data will be provided by MCA member company plants.
Analysis
will be made by the contractor,
it is expected that about 500
individual member company plant responses will be obtained. Data
will be encoded for confidentiality and to facilitate retrieval
for analysis.
Original data sheets will not be copied and will
be returned to the originator after the study is complete.
Infor­
mation will be gathered on emission characteristics (flow volume,
composition, concentration, solubility, etc.), by sources (stacks,
vents, reliefs, etc.) according to plant location.
Current levels
of control, the methods employed, and the costs will be stated.
Estimates of the cost of control will be compared against known
situations to validate overall estimating procedures.
Manufac­
turers will be interviewed on a selected basis for further cross­
comparison and to apply their knowledge of the most recent RACT.
CMA 037070
F
To avoid duplication of effort, liaison will continue with
other organizations, such as the Texas Chemical Council, con­
cerned with similar studies.
There is little doubt as to EPA direction.. EPA considers
nearly all hydrocarbons to be photochemical oxidant precursors,
regardless of their relative photolytic reactivity.
EPA has
advised 45 states to revise their State Implementation Plans
(SIP), and to ensure compliance with the Clean Air Act of 1970
(P.L. 91-604) which does not allow new source permits in non­
attainment areas.
Of the 247 Air Quality Regions (AQR), 74 are
classed non-attainment because of oxidant levels.
Major pro­
jects are stopped, -in jeopardy, or delayed because P-L. 91-604
does not permit new sources in non-attainment regions.
EPA has
also announced a goal of 90% reduction in hydrocarbon vapor
losses from autos and light trucks.
Currently, there is no industry data for development of
rational regulations or workable guidelines.
This study is in­
tended to define the cost parameters so that a cost-benfit as­
sessment can be related to the results of varying levels of con­
trol and different strategies that could be employed to reach
them.
Acceptance of the project proposal is recommended.
concurs.
Staff
i
it
MCA
j
i
f
f
CMA 037071
I
Exhibit C
PROPOSED STUDY
ON
OXIDANT LEVEL CONTROL STRATEGY ANOMALIES
When P.L. 91-604, Clean Air Act Amendments of 1970, was
enacted, it was expected that national ambient air quality
standards (NAAQS) would be met nationwide by 1975 or mid-1977
at the latest.
Timely compliance has not been achieved for th
criteria pollutants in many of the 247 air quality regions (ACR).
Oxidant (ozone) levels are being exceeded in 74 regions, nearly
all of which encompass chemical industry concentrations.
prove their technical understanding for enforcing the NAAQS, EPA
studies in 1974-75 focused on the contribution of urban ozone pre­
cursor emissions to ambient ozone concentrations and on the rel­
ative roles of local ozone formations and long range transport.
Even though observed high ozone concentrations cannot be explained
in terms of air flow from specific point sources or even from sin­
gle urban-industrial sources, EPA now is acting to require com­
pliance with P.L. 91-604.
Reduction of hydrocarbon emissions from
mobile and stationary sources will be required, in spite of the
fact that evidence exists showing that such will not necessarily
prevent the occurrence of high ozone concentrations at any given
site.
In order to provide data as to the effectiveness of-proposed
hydrocarbon control strategies, the Air Quality Committee (AQC)
r commends a study to assess the relationship between hydrocarbon
levels from point sources and ozone levels.
The study needs to be undertaken now so that the results can
be available prior to the adoption of hydrocarbon controls, ex­
pected during the second quarter of 1977.
The study, proposed to
be conducted by the Radian Corporation, will cost $54,500.
Twelve metropolitan areas would be analyzed, selected as rep­
resentative of chemical industry concentrations (e.g., Houston)
and of non-chemical areas (e.g., Denver).
Emission inventories
for hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides will be obtained for recent
years, organized on a uniform basis, and placed on magnetic tape
for data reduction after certification of the basic validity of
the data. Ambient air data will be obtained for comparable time
periods and qualified to be certain that it is correct, is rep-
CMA 037072
resentative, and covers the same time period as the emission
data.
Correlations then will be drawn among high hourly ozone
values, their persistence, annual average concentration of
ozone and hydrocarbon emissions. A special analysis will be
made of unusual episodes and particular attention will be given
to synoptic meteorological conditions associated with the unu­
sual episodes.
A report will be prepared describing the results
and whether, in retrospect, current or proposed hydrocarbon con­
trol strategies would have worked to reduce ozone levels in the
vicinity where control was imposed.
Regional differences will
be exposed.
The final report will include data describing regional var­
iations and characteristic patterns needed to help formulate
local decisions as to the severity, complexity and appropriate­
ness of the regional control strategies themselves.
This could
be extended to define which hydrocarbon species need to be con­
trolled first or most, whether drastic reductions in auto traffic
will work in the particular area in question, and what the con­
sequences of exceeding the standards by different amounts and
varying frequencies would be, based on what has happened before.
Acceptance of the proposed study is recommended.
concurs.
Staff
MCA
BD-10/12/76
CMA 037073
I
Exhibit H
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMITTEE
OCTOBER 12,
1976
In an effort to illustrate to you the relative importance of
matters that are now pending pertaining to international trade,
! would like to quote from Ambassador Frederick Dent of the
Office of Special Trade Representative (STR).
The occasion was
a plenary meeting in Washington some two weeks ago for a group
of Industry Sector Advisory committees (or ISAC). Ambassador
pent told us that imports into this country in 1976 are expect­
ed to be up 20% over those of 1975, while exports will be up
only 5%. The expected trade deficit will be approximately
4*o billion dollars.
Imports of petroleum products in the U.S.A.
1973 were valued at 7 billion dollars.
This year they are
expected to reach 32 billion dollars.
Gentlemen, the need for industry support in the international
trade area has never been as great as it is now.
Today in the
United States the cost of feedstock for the petrochemical in­
dustry is less than the corresponding cost in the Common Market
(EC), but it is expected to be equal to that of the common
Market in about four years. Your International Trade committee
suggests that strong continued industry support on internation­
al trade is a must.
I am advised that the subject of trade did not appear in the
top 10 items which certain MCA member companies agreed to be
those subjects of the greatest concern to them according to a
recent survey.
However, it does appear that we could have
long-range problems in our economy, unless international trade
for our country increases to offset these deficits.
With this scenario in mind, I would now like to give you an
°utline of what I hope to cover in the next 10 to 12 minutes.
First, i plan to spend about 3 minutes on the status of the
'T negotiations.
The main part of my presentation to you
1 last about 8 minutes, and this is devoted to the work
t is going on in ISAC-5 (Chemicals).
i would like to wind
UP with a brief comment concerning OCITA (Office of chemical
industry Trade Advisor) .
f
CMA 037085
m
2
In regard to GATT, I am aware that Dr. Dawson has pretty much
kept you up to date in this area.
The written report of these
remarks that you will receive will give you the details of how
the tariff formula, which was first tabled by the U.S.A., dif­
fers from the one that the common Market brought out in.July.
The tariff formula tabled by the U. S. suggests that all tariffs
above 6.7% be cut by 60% (the maximum allowed by the Trade Act),
and those below 6.7% by a formula of cuts between 50-60%.
The
EC formula proposes tariffs would be cut by their own amount, a
process that would be repeated four times.
That is to say, a
tariff of 50% would initially be cut b^ 50%, the result being a
25% tariff.
Doing this four more times would mean an ultimate
tariff of 13%.
The European version tends to embrace more
"harmonization" in that it cuts the higher duties more than our
formula does.
we remain critical of the EC proposal in that it specifically
excludes agricultural products.
The common Market still hopes
to keep this delicate subject separate from other trade areas.
The International Trade Committee shares the feeling that the
EC formula is not ambitious enough since it would result in an
av rage reduction of the current duties of about 32% and that
is before any exceptions are taken into account.
I understand
that Mr. Ford during his visit to the Summit Meeting in Puerto
Rfco stated that the U. S. should shoot for a target cut of 35%
of the current tariffs of our EC trading partners.
Since
Mr. Ford was referring to a cut after exceptions are taken into
account, you can see this leaves a wide gap for our negotiators
to close.
As to the timing of the final decision on the tariff formula,
you are aware that the Swedes have recently settled their elec­
tions.
Soon it will be the West Germans and the Japanese. At
the first of this coming year, there will be a replacement of
eight of the nine EC Ministers in Brussels. All of this, cou­
pled with our own elections in November, leads your Committee
to the conclusion that not only will there be an agreement on
the formula, but, also, no serious negotiations will begin
before early to mid-1977 at best.
CMA 037086
I
3
government continues, however, to let us know that things are
indeed busy in Geneva with various Multilateral Trade Negotia­
tion (MTN) subgroups at work hammering out preliminary details.
These subgroups have been meeting with our trading partners in
an effort to come to a mutual understanding on how to treat
such matters as: subsidies, countervailing duties, access to
supply* government procurement, standards and codes, GATT re­
form, and the very important subject of non-tariff barriers.
Due to a wide variety of non-tariff barriers currently employ­
ed, it is thought by many that the settlement of this matter is
more critical than the agreement upon a tariff formula.
ISAc-5,
six members of whom are from the MCA International Trade Com­
mittee, are providing U. S. chemical industry overviews on how
we wish these matters to be handled when negotiations do finally
take place.
This leads me into the subject of how ISAC-5 is progressing. At
our meeting some two weeks ago in Washington, we were told by
repr sentatives of the Department of Commerce, as well as the
Office of Special Trade Representative, that ISAC-5 was better
prepared and better organized than any of the remaining 25 ISACs.
This praise by the government is not meant to imply that we nec­
essarily expect to do better in the negotiations than we did in
the Kennedy Round nor better than any of the other idustries of
the United States, but we do want you to know that we see no
reason for government to eventually point the finger at our in­
dustry and tell us that we failed in doing our homework.
There still remains an inadequate two-way flow of information
in these large and complex government private sector committee
structures. At the same time, it is agreed that they are func­
tioning better than they were at the start.
STR continues to
tell us that they are determined to further improve the ISAC
system and that the outcome of the negotiations will depend, to
a great extent, on just how well we have prepared the Geneva
negotiators, which in turn, is saying just how well the ISAC
functioned.
CMA 037087
4
Due to the complexity of the chemical industry, we were forced
in ISAC-5 to fragment into seven subcommittees which are;
Benzenoid Intermediates, Pigments, Fertilizers, Pesticides,
Inorganics, Miscellaneous Organics, and Dyestuffs.
The full
ISAC-5 Committee is expected to meet four times this year, while
the subgroups will meet at least that many times. At the pre­
sent time, we are hard at work trying to determine just which
chemical products would be most sensitive to tariff cuts.
This
is the exceptions list.
There is one key area that I solicit
the help of those of you present today in this respect, and
that is in the field of inorganic products.
More input into
our committee is definitely required by industry to be sure
that correct decisions by ISAC-5 members are being made.
This
input, as it pertains to sensitivity, should be made directly
to the Department of Commerce, and the appropriate address is
given in the written report of these remarks.
Industry Consultation Policy Staff, Department of Commerce,
Washington, D. C.
20230
As ISAC-5 works with this exceptions list and brings it to a
conclusion, we are informed by government that our next step
will be one of being certain that we can ultimately provide the
necessary justification for our decisions.
By utilization of a
checklist, we are preparing ourselves to address these questions
from government. We are also establishing priorities within the
xceptions list itself.
Thus, the critical area for our indus­
try will probably reside in the rules for determining exception^,
and the ultimate ability of our negotiators to obtain exceptions
for the import sensitive products whether it is on a multilateral
or bilateral basis.
In addition to this work on exceptions, we continue to press
government for the conversion of our specific and compound
duties to an ad valorem basis, the selection of the base year
being the critical matter.
Some base year has to be agreed
upon in order to provide a starting point for the calculation
of the value of the concessions to be negotiated.
This is more
important for the chemical industry than perhaps any other due
to the fact that we have such a large number of specific and
compound duties and to the sharp rises in the chemical prices
over the last several years.
CMA 037088
r
Finally* I wish to report that Dr. Dawson, in the capacity of
the Chemical Industry Trade Advisor, has reactivated the
Technical Advisory Committee. We will have our first meeting
tomorrow in New York City.
Dr. Dawson has restructured this
Committee, and it is planned that this is yet another way that
oar industry can be sure of addressing all agencies of our
government with uniform voice.
In addition to MCA; DCMA, SOCMA,
spX, and various members of ISAC-5 will all be brought together
tomorrow under one committee.
This organization is not restrict­
ed as is the ISAC program in that two-way communication is pos­
sible.
One item that was not included in my outline that may be of in­
terest to you. Gentlemen, deals with a recent survey sent to
the chemical industry by the Stanford Research Institute (SRI)
in conjunction with the U. S. Department of Labor.
Due to the
detail that the survey called for, an overwhelming number of
U. S.-based chemical companies have declined to respond.
^In conclusion, within the next 12 months, there is a reasonable
chance that our negotiators will begin a serious dialogue with
There continues to be a serious need for
continued industry input to insure we take advantage of all
available opportunities.
Having been in the position of Chair­
man' of this Committee only about four months now, I am happy to
see Dave Dawson out there amongst you, and he has agreed to
help me answer any questions.
our-trading partners.
Thank you.
V
CMA 037089
Exhibit I
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
E. E. CHRISTOFANO, CHAIRMAN
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH COMMITTEE
OCTOBER 12, 1976
Since my last report to the Board in February 1976, rep­
resentatives of the Occupational Health Committee testified
on behalf of MCA before the Subcommittee on Manpower and Housing
of the House of Representatives committee on Government Operations
at an oversight hearing on the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), before the National Academy of Sciences
committee on Public Information in the Prevention of Occupational
cancer and met with Dr. Morton Corn, the Assistant Secretary
of Labor. An underlying theme of all three appearances was
that r gulation of each and every chemical in the work environ­
ment under separate rules is unworkable,
instead it was urged
|that entire sectors of the chemical industry be covered by
Simple guidelines enforced by inspectors experienced in that
special industry.
Industries, such as papermaking, pesticide
manufacture, printing ink and petroleum refining were mentioned
as examples where such regulation would be appropriate.
, Recently the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH) and OSHA have begun to prepare industry­
wide guidelines on pesticide manufacture and printing ink for­
mulation. Furthermore, at a recent NIOSH Workshop on Regulation
of Pesticides in the Workplace, Mr. Steven Wodka, Legislative
Assistant for The Oil Chemical and Atomic Workers suggested an
approach to worker health protection similar to the views
expressed previously at the hearing and meetings just mentioned.
Encouraged by the acceptance being gained for the idea
of preparing regulations on an industry-by-industry basis, the
committee intends to further pursue its attempts at simplifying
rules by working with the agencies involved.
The issue of identification of all chemicals including
trade name products entering the workplace surfaced at the
Congressional Oversight Hearing mentioned earlier. At that
time the widespread practices among chemical manufacturers
Nre disclosed whereby products are identified only by trade
name with inadequate instructions for safe handling on the
I
CMA 037090
label. We predict that complete disclosure of the composition
of trade name products will become a major effort by OSHA in
the next year or two.
Recently the Committee sponsored the preparation of an
article by Dr. w. R. Gaffey, a leading epidemiologist, which
provides guidance in how to collect health and employment data,
including exposure information, that will be meaningful and
adequate for future epidemiological studies.
To extend such
studies across the entire petrochemical industry, we hope to
begin a joint mortality study soon with the American Petroleum
Institute.
At this time the Committee is beginning a feasibility
study (in conjunction with the American Petroleum Institute)
on the gathering and examination of mortality statistics among
petrochemical workers.
Since the Committee believes that
worker health experience will remain topical over the next
.several years, it is also investigating a tumor registry among
MCA member companies to be maintained by a contractor.
It is
expected that budget requests for these two activities will
,be firm by January 1977.
I
CMA 037091
CMA REDACTION DOCUMENTS
VOLUME 4
37096 - 37464
11/22/76 (CMA 12581-12582 and 37097 - 37132) - CMA Board of
Directors Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed the report of its director of government relations
(37100 and 37112-118), describing the "important new laws" passed at the
end of the 1976 second legislative session, including:
"The Toxic Substances Control Act (PL 94-469), finally became the
law after five years of deliberation and controversy, thus establishing Federal
controls over the manufacturer, distribution and use of chemicals." (CMA
37112), discussing bills which didn't pass but which were "likely to surface
again," including: "A bill to provide stricter regulations of lobbying...;
Common Cause is a strong advocate, while Nader groups and the AFL-CIO
supported only the House version..." CMA concealed the "apprehension" of
"business" that "dues paid to trade associations by corporate members could
be subject to public disclosure under some concepts." CMA concealed its
discussion of the failure of the Clean Act Amendments whose filibuster
Senator Musky blamed on the auto industry. The CMA concealed its
discussion of "Industrial Organization, the so-called Hart Bill" who sponsors
retirees and which "singles out chemicals manufacturing and other industry
for possible breakup, creates a special commission to make divestiture
investigations and a special court to compel dismantling." (CMA 37113).
CMA concealed its having reported the failure of bills which would have
provided for "the outlawing of corporate bribes to foreign officials" and
proposals "to create a new consumer protection agency," expand the FTC,
CMA concealed its description of Jimmy Carter as "an anti­
establishment candidate for nearly two years" but that "Jimmy Carter now IS
the establishment." (CMA 37114), The CMA concealed its statement that
Carter "is now confronted with the dilemma of some delicacy: How to begin
to direct and to motivate the people and the mechanisms he as so recently
and soundly castigated." (CMA 37115).
The CMA concealed its discussion of "congressional leaders who"
have "obviously enjoyed the independence and status which the years of
confrontation [during the 'stalemate government' of Presidents Nixon and
Ford] have produced." (CMA 3711 5). These legislatures simply "covet their
independence of action" and consider their "important role" as being nothing
more than "punishing one President" or "making his successor appear
ineffectual..." Longtime Carter watchers point out that "he adopted a tough,
no compromise attitude towards the Georgia legislature during his term as
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
Governor." (CMA 37115). CMA concealed its belief that "the incoming
President...would apparently retain the present non-degradation concepts of
the Clean Air Act" and "has called for stricter enforcement of water pollution
control laws and evidently will oppose efforts to weaken Federal Water
Pollution Control Act." (CMA 37116).
CMA concealed the report of its Chemical Packaging Committee (and
its existence) (CMA 37119-123): "Times have changed! Just a few years
ago, chemical packaging engineers might be concentrating on the steel
thickness of a drum for solvents...," etc., but "today, he must also know
about the Transportation Safety Act of 1974, consolidation of DOT
Regulations... and, looking to the future, regulations on solid waste deposal
and carcinogens." And why have times changed so? "We believe the most
important factor is the concern on the part of both private and public sectors
for greater safety in the packaging, transportation, and distribution of
hazardous materials."
CMA concealed its discussion of DOT recognition of "cost/benefit" it
"considers in any reviews of package regulation changes. Packaging is seen
as a cost item in our industry." (CMA 37120). The CMA concealed the fact
its Packaging Committee "together with the Transportation Equipment and
Transportation and Distribution Committees, sponsors symposium on
hazardous materials regulations with over 1100 attendees from all concerned
shipper and carriers groups..." Other evidence indicates the CMA's
preference for regulation by DOT. CMA concealed "DOT has already
indicated that they have underdevelopment regulations applying to the proper
packaging and transportation of health products such as carcinogens,
munegions?? and teartatogens." (CMA 37122).
CMA concealed its Chemical Packaging Committees' reference to its
"responsibility...to assist the chemical industry to meet all legal requirements
while maintaining a low-risk position in transportation with proper
cost/benefit consideration. And we intend to make known the position or
industry on legislative and regulatory matters." (CMA 37122).
Consistent with its systematic redaction of similar reports which CMA,
despite repeated orders of the court thinks it has a right to "redact" as "nonresponsive" or "unlikely to lead to the discovery of relevant evidence, here
again CMA conceals the Public Relations Committees' report to the board of
directors. Indeed, the very existence of the Public Relations Committee was
systematically concealed by CMA in its first three document production.
Plaintiffs allege that the "scientific" efforts conducted by the CMA
were adjuncts to its overall public relations efforts: CMA redacted as
irrelevant its goal for its previous year (one of two):
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
"That we should establish closer relationships with other functional
areas of CMA so a more meaningful contribution to the industry total
communications could be made. These things have been done. The assaults
on the chemical industry by media and government in the past twelve
months have made it imperative." (CMA 37124). There is a reference to
the activities of that committee Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee
(CRAC) "an opportunity to participate in Dr. Heckert's SPECIAL COMMITTEE
ON TOXIC LEGISLATION" which CMA says "demonstrated what can be
accomplished through interaction of functions when proper leadership is
provided." [I don't know what this means exactly though. We do know that
the beginning of this committee (whose existence concealed by CMA) began
"about eighteen months ago" and this would have been around the time of
the Tenneco/SPI "jurisdictional dispute" of the spring of 1975.] It was
"about eighteen months ago" that the "Public Relation Committee stepped
up its practice of meeting with the leadership of certain other functional
committees, particularly Government Relations, Technical and Legal
Advisory." The Technical Group would have included the vinyl panel and the
link with the vinyl panel and it begins with Tenneco, who shared the SPI's
similar committee. The plaintiffs allege that the CMA's "scientific" and
public relations activities are intertwined and CMA has redacted this
statement as "proof that joint committee action can get things done...:
...What we have found is that we can work together - that we have a
common purpose and pursuit. We have agreed upon issues that should the
greatest concern of the association [referring to the CMA generally and the
"joint committees" such as those discussed here.]" These are human health
and the environment, and the increasing government constraints which he
wrote industry management of its resources.
CMA concealed specific references to liaisons between its Public
Relations Committee and its Air Quality Committee, its Occupational Health
Committee, its Government Relations Committee, as well as its Legal
Advisory and Chemical Relations Advisory Committee. (CMA 37124). CMA
concealed that "the Air Quality Committee, for example, will provide facts on
what the chemical industry has done about air pollution, and provide the
industry position on current legislative and regulatory matters in active
collaboration with the Public Relations Committee." This document spells
out that "members of the [technical] task force which service coordinators of
the [public relations] project, recruit the best possible spokesman from
MCA's membership and arrange platforms in leading cities where maximum
speaker [in accordance with this plan for "joint committee action" with the
Public Relations Committee] would develop his topic in his own way,
weaving in the MCA-developed material at will." The type of spokesman we
have in mind are you gentlemen, the directors of MCA, supported by other
chief executive officers not present today. (CMA 37125).
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
The CMA concealed its discussion of the advantages of its plan to
interject the Public Relations Committee into actively resolve with other
committees: "The short range [advantage] is obvious—to gain some badly
needed statements of the chemical industry point of view and various media.
The longer range advantage will be gained as we found as we build up this
corps of spokesman. MCA has a constant need for industry experts who can
provide statements and can make appearances on relevantly short notice..."
For the industry to provide "news media" with 'the other sides' position
when the story [relating to, say, air quality, etc.] is breaking." The CMA
concealed its goal as to provide, al carte, experts to furnish "the other sides"
position anytime there is a "whole sordid story" to tell which the chemical
industry needs to come up with "the other side" with the assistance of the
CMA's Public Relations Committee. (CMA 37125).
CMA concealed that its leading environmental "Journal ChemEcology"
was, in fact, the creature of the CMA's Public Relations Committee whose
express purpose was to "expand further its coverage of member companies
success stories in the areas of environment and toxic substances." (CMA
37126).
CMA concealed its "three-times-a-year CHEMICAL ISSUES AND
COMMENTARY" which is described as a "survey of member companies" by
the CMA's Public Relations Committee in order "to identify emerging issues"
and which "practice goes back to 1973, when we began polling people
participating in MCA activities in six companies and the professional staff of
MCA..." but which has "now grown to nineteen companies and MCA with
over 400 respondents." MCA has consistently concealed all references to
and any documents generated as the result of the surveys. It is not
believable such surveys, especially in the 1973-74 era would not contain
responsive information.
Consistent with its systematic practice, CMA concealed the CMA staff
report which includes a report from the chairman of its Occupational Health
Committee that the director of OSHA had recently told him OSHA "would
welcome industry input early in the development of any proposed standard....
Information desired includes toxicological work place exposure data on
chemicals to be regulated, which would become part of the pertinent
record." (CMA 37131), which references to CMA sponsored TSCA seminars,
its sponsorship of "a symposium entitled the 'Approaching Toxic Era' in
Houston, November 11th, (CMA 37132). "MCA made public additional
toxicological data relating to the safety of acrylonitrile monitor on November
9th as a result of feeding liquid acrylonitrile to pregnant rats.
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
In a case in which plaintiffs have put the CMA's activities regard SD56 front and center, CMA has redacted relevant references to its having
"suspended circulation of eight chemical safety data sheets pending their
revision to incorporate present knowledge regarding property, characteristics
and handling" and its promise to reissue them someday. During this time
and years to come the CMA continue to "sit on" SD-56, despite its promise
revision as early as 1 974,
1/11/77 (CMA 12583-12584 and 37133-37170) - CMA Board of
Directors Meeting Minutes.
Again, CMA concealed the agenda for its meeting, including both
irrelevant and relevant matter pertaining to its Chemical Relations Advisory
Committee (CRAC), its Industrial Relations Advisory Committee (IRAQ), and
its Legal Advisory Committee. In fact, although CMA has produced at least
three prior versions of the document found at CMA 37134, and after
stipulating that these minutes weren't confidential years ago, and after never
having previously asserted any claim or privilege whatsoever with the regard
to this document, and after having been ordered unequivocally to produce
this document in its entirety at the very latest by the time of the last Case
Master meeting, CMA has redacted a portion of a page two pages behind it
(CMA 37136), as "privileged." Only by reference to the (previously
concealed) agenda, is it possible to even guess this material probably relates
to the Legal Advisory Committee portion of the Board of Director's report.
CMA was ordered to produce in its entirety months if not years ago.
The CMA concealed its discussion of "Corporate Government
Regulations"-effect on innovation and the express desire "without
questioning governmental regulation per say to impose the least possible
burden in accomplishing reasonable objections." CMA considered soliciting
"industry-wide documentation" of this propertied phenomena ("this adverse
effect on innovation phenomena") in the interest of being persuasive..." and
the Board of Director (Mr. Krumrei) was to summit a memorandum on the
subject to the Executive Committee. (CMA 37137).
As usual, CMA concealed all the information on its financial position
including information that will allow one to see the total amount spent on
CMA's entire Technical Panel was a mere $493,836, less than what it spent
on public and government relations, combined and that its final chloride
research received only a small small fraction of its funds. CMA further
concealed the existence of the "plastic scoop" or its financial package. (CMA
37140)
CMA concealed its survey of member companies to obtain "sound
data on chemical manufacturing industry operating costs and investment
Q-.\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
relating to environmental management" which it said was "similar to that
used in 1965" and enabled "direct comparisons with similar information
obtained in surveys "conducted in 1962, 1967, 1972, and 1975." Such
data "has provided MCA with factual information useful in the growing public
debate over costs/benefits. (CMA 37142-37144).
CMA concealed the report of its Food, Drug and Cosmetic Chemicals
Committee (CMA 371 52-153) discussing the U.S. Supreme Court decision
and U.S.V. Park holding that "a corporate executive could be prosecuted
under the criminal provisions of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act for
product adulteration, irrespective of his personal ignorance of the situation
causing the adulteration and however remote his involvement in that
situation" which it describes as imposing "absolute criminal liability based
merely upon the responsibility of the individual corporate officers for certain
areas of activity." (CMA 37151).
CMA concealed the report from its Industrial Advisory Committee that
industry might expect "increased future activity" in areas relating to
"occupational safety and equal employment opportunity. Whether you have
unions or not, your employees are becoming aware of their rights in these
areas. If you have unions, many are building technical staffs in the safety,
hygiene and health fields the way their locals have auditing the safety of our
work places. Several companies in our industry have experienced employee
health crisis in the last year, with resulting employee and public relations
problems. We must be prepared to devote more management time and
resources to avoid further employee anxieties about the safety of their work
"Under the best of circumstances, those of us with unions can expect
to hear more about health and safety in future negotiations. Unions are
impatient with OSHA, indeed, the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers is
suing OSHA. We should expect that this impatient will result in a more
direct approach with employers, including demands for Safety Committees
with authority, of union safety consultants at our plants and hire visibility for
such union-oriented medical consultants such as Dr. Irving Selicoff??..."
(CMA 37155). CMA concealed its characterization of OSHA at the time
Morton Corn took office: "The perception of OSHA by the public,
government, and industry at the time was highly unflattering. Morton Corn
has not yet succeeded in reversing, that view but is determined to do so..."
"In short, Morton Corn is making OSHA a new and different kind of
organization..." which is describes as being "on a more professional level"
and "certain period." (CMA 37159)
CMA concealed its "contact with the (ILO) International Labor
Organization through the International Chemicals Employers Labor Relations
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
Committee, which is in effect with need the caucus for ILO purposes of
chemical employers throughout the world." This demonstrates the close
lesion between CMA and its European counterparts. CMA concealed its
"problematical" concern as to whether the U.S. "will remain in the ILO" at all
anymore. It reports that the "Chamber of Commerce, which represents U.S.
management in the ILO, has taken the position that so long as we are
members, we should be fully active, particularly in seeking needed reforms.
This appears to be proper position for MCA to maintain."
CMA concealed CRAC"s solicitation of thirty-five trade organizations
requesting "that MCA presumes the role of coordinator in communicating
with the EPA in respect of regulations implanting the TSCA." (CMA
37168).
CMA apparently deleted exhibit F (37163-167) in its entirety, which
consisted of the report of the CMA Legal Advisory Committee. (CMA
37137).
2/8/77 (CMA 12585-12587 and 37171-37202) - CMA Board of
Directors Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed its establishment of a "toxic substance's contact
responsible for receiving..." from CRAC, specifically a document of a type
CMA systematically concealed entitled "Toxic Substances Management
Memo" (CMA 37175). CMA concealed its proposed program on the OSHA
regulation of Benzene (CMA 37181-185) and its position on the Toxic
Substances Control Act (CMA 37185) which includes references to the
CMA's "consolidation" organization of other "available data" for presentation
to OSHA, which is "meant to apply primarily to epidemiology studies carried
out in various companies, but not publicized from a concern that they did not
represent a large enough base. Adding them together may provide a more
convincing picture. Again, it was felt that outside expertise should be
sought to consolidate the information." (CMA 37182). This study turns out
to have been conducted by Otto Wong?? and EHA or NCNSR if I not
mistaken. This indicates the reanalysis of the existing studies was the goal
from the outset.
CMA concealed its boasting over the success of its CRAC and
influencing EPA policy, including EPA's "dropping its proposal that impurities
acceptance be reported with annual production volumes." (CMA 37191).
As usual, CMA concealed the report of its Government Relations
Committee, which includes a hilarious recollection of how easy CMA used to
keep bills off the Senate floor or by just leaving town to "tend to my cows"
when "pressure got too great." "I'm not saying this was the way to run the
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
government, but it was the time when businessmen had more influence in
Congress than they have today. But that day went out with one man, one
vote drive that took place more than a decade ago, [the Civil Rights
Movement??], and for a variety of other reasons." CMA also "redacted its
bias recollection of the history of the evolution of union influence, the
influence of television on "selecting and influencing members of Congress, as
well as the rise of public interests groups, " including the Washington offices
of several large companies following World War II: "In the last two decades,
trade associations have become as much of Washington growth phenomena
as government itself." (CMA 37194). CMA redacted its complaints that it
"lacks...grass roots voice" and that many Congress members are telling CMA
that "opinions from the corporate board room no longer carry the weight they
once did. And the vernacular of Capital Hill, they ask us: 'How many votes
have you got?'" The speaker analogizes the tally on election day to the
corporate managers "bottom-line on your corporate financial statement."
What CMA concealed by concealing the origins of its "grass roots
voice on Capital Hill" is that it marshaled two "resources that presently are
largely untapped by business-employees and stock holders" who should
receive "an understanding of the kind of governmental climate that exists for
preservation of private enterprise, and an understanding of how that personal
welfare relates to that of a corporation...," ect. (CMA 371 95). This
contemplates the "mobilization" of employees and stockholders of CMA
members. (CMA 37196). CMA concealed the activities of its Labels and
Precautionary Information Committee (37199-200) including its discussion of
coordination of efforts with the CIA of Britain, testimony before a
Congressional Sub-committee with oversight responsibilities for OSHA with
resulting "opportunity to influence Congressional thinking..." and "wrestling
with the problem of labeling for current chronic hazards, problems involving
carcinogenicity comutinicity??, teragencity, hepatoxicicity, and the difficult
interface between suspected carcinogencity and test animals versus proven
carcinogencity" and the appointment of a sub-committee (including members
of at least three defendants) to "prepare recommendations in this critical
area." The activities of this committee were systematically concealed by
CMA.
CMA concealed its publication by the same Dr. Gaffe who is the
epidemiologist who originally studied the vinyl industry and who
subsequently the vinyl chloride research coordinators: "Regulatory agencies
often use the findings of the epidemiology studies when they make decisions
and issue guidelines. The kinds of epidemiology studies, however, as well as
the data they require in their scope of usefulness, are sometimes not well
understood. On recommendation of the Occupational Health Committee,
therefore, MCA engaged Dr. R. Gaffe to write an explanatory article in
technical language on Occupational Epidemiology" which had been printed as
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
a four-page booklet entitled "A Brief Overview of Occupational
Epidemiology." Dr. Gaffe "was with Equitable Environmental Health, Inc.,
when engaged to write the article" but is now at Standford Research
Institute. (CMA 37202). CMA subsequently other references to this paper.
3/8/77 (CMA 12588-12589 and 37203-37260) - CMA Board of
Directors Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed its board of director's "resolution on public interests
law firms" (CMA 37206 and 37212-213) which expressly endorses the
"National Legal Center for the Public Interest" which it says is dedicated to
"traditional concepts of private property and competition merit accuracy."
These firms were formed as a direct result "public interest law firms" such
Ralph Nader Possessive Public Citizen Litigation Groups, National Resources
Defense Council, and Searra Club Legal Defense Fund "employing 300 full­
time lawyers" with budgets exceeding $10,000,000 a year. The Specific
Legal Foundation (SLF) was established in 1973, in Sacramento, CA, to
counteract the activities of the above firms by supporting the free enterprise
system and traditional concepts of private property and competition. It has
had many successes. The National Legal Center for the Public Interest was
established in Washington, D.C., in 1975 with "four principle objections:"
(1) To help establish independent regional legal foundations dedicated to a
balanced view of the role of law in achieving economic and social progress
[i.e. again it]; (2) To research national legal issues from a litigation point of
view and develop strategies to achieve the foundations' [?] objectives...; (3)
To act as a resource center regional litigation foundations' in obtaining
qualified researchers and experts..."; and (4) To identify legislative,
administrative and juridical trends likely to result in future litigation."
Under the auspices of the MLCCPI, many other regional foundations
have been organized, patterned after the four-runner PLF. "These
foundations will support in the courts the tenets of free enterprise which
nobody else appears to be doing in the area of public interest law."
CMA concealed the Legal Advisory Committee's endorsement of the
activities of these organizations and adopted an attached resolution of
endorsement.
CMA, who can't seem to find the secrecy agreements its solicited and
other relevant documents concealed the existence of its Technical
Information Retrieval Committee with Gulf Oil Chemicals Corporation as Vice
Chairman. (CMA 37214).
CMA concealed its staff report concerning MCA testimony before the
National Advisory Committee on Occupational Safety and Health (NACOSH)
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
"on regulations on worker exposure to suspected chemical carcinogens"
proposed by OSHA with areas of particular concern including: "For one,
OSHA is considering only inherent toxic properties and ignoring dosage,
duration and time of exposure in interaction with other substances" and
urging NACOSH "to deliberate at great length" over a definition of a
The CMA concealed its "go slow" approach to FDA regulations for
good laboratory practices. (CMA 37216). The continuous mechanism of the
Technical Publications Program has resulted in the recent suspension from
circulation of five Chemical Safety Data Sheets on trychloride, ethyline,
perchlorine ethyline, dimethyl sulfate, acrylontrile and napthalene since the
first notification of suspensions in November, 1976, and that its Chemical
Safety Data Sheets on arsenic, tryoxide, chlorine, morihydride, zirconium,
and afnium powder have been withdrawn permanently. The CMA concealed
its seminar on corporate readiness for compliance with TOSCA attended by
approximately 500. (CMA 37217).
4/12/77 - (CMA 12590-12592 and 37219-37260) - MCA Board of
Directors Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed existence and activities of its various committees,
including its Air Quality Committee, its Government Relations Committees,
and its Political Action Committee: "Dr. Barnes spoke of his company's
experience relating to 1 500 of their employees participating in seven Political
Action Committees distributed regionally around the country. He expressed
the opinion that this had been successful effort in support of the free
enterprise system, and offered to furnish others with information on Dow's
approach" to PACS. (CMA 37222).
CMA concealed the report of its Air Quality Committee including the
observation that "we are on strong technical ground in saying that oxidant is
relatively insensitive to changes in hydrocarbons and that hydrocarbons can
not be controlled sufficiently in most places to obtain the oxidant's standard.
Los Angeles is a prime example."
MCA concealed that it had "been most active in testifying, writing and
visiting Congressmen and meeting with their staffs to seek all the
amendments proposed in Mr. Polzer's testimony." (CMA 37240).
The CMA concealed its discussion of the EPA Study of Synthetic
Organic Chemical Industry and CMA's coordination with SOCMA with regard
to a total of about forty chemicals: "EPA states that synthetic organic
chemicals contributed 10% of the total hydrocarbon emissions from
stationary sources. They state that control hinges primarily on proper plant
Q:\wp51\Mollie\37096-37464
design in operation that will require depth of knowledge by EPA of our
operations that is unprecedented."
CMA concealed its discussion of "strong criticism against EPA" by the
EDF that benzene was a significant hazard and carcinogen, resulting in the
"emergency" which resulted in the development of "a special MCA task
group to handle this item alone." However, "since this is a single product,
response to EPA is being made on an individual company basis [as if MCA
were not coordinating the violation of the anti-trustl. Eleven MCA member
companies are participating. (CMA 37241).
The CMA concealed the existence of the Foster D. Snell, Inc.
Hydrocarbon Control Cost Study and resulting questionnaire it was funding:
"We've never attempted anything to this depth before, but then, we've never
faced $5-$15 billion investment costs for control of a single class of pollution
before..." He says the study was "an eye-opener" and "will show we
discharge a greater tonnage of hydrocarbon than we thought; that we do not
have a good estimate on emissions on a number of sources; that likely the
majority of our total poundage emissions derive from only a fraction of our
total sources." The CMA has determined that information such as this is not
likely to lead to discoverable evidence in this case, indicating a willful
ignorance of plaintiff's pleadings and discovery. (CMA 37241).
CMA conceals the was its Air Quality Committee orders up a
"Scientific" Committee requiring "medical epidemiology input" as if it were a
peca?? "EPA is revising the six existing air qualities standards and will be
adding new ones. Our Committee will need medical epidemiology input if we
are to react.. Unless you object, my intention of a nucleus medical of
representation from your companies to determine the feasibility of a rebuttal.
A second item needing medical input is an advice on the concentrations of
the community environment that are considered safe for all of our chemicals.
The current procedure is to use the OSHA standards and arbitrarily take a
percentage of them and call this safe for the public. We will have to do
better than this for benzene, achrylinitride and eventually all the rest. We
would plan to use your a forementioned medical representatives to guide
committees in this crucial area also. The third item is that relatively little
attention has been paid by control agencies to our emissions during start-up
and shut-downs, emergency releases, and fugitive losses. Various estimates
indicate that they may be as large as our normal emissions and control
agencies are starting to note this." (CMA 37242). This is relevant and
should not have been concealed.
Compare CMA 12592 with, say, 37240-242. The redacted material
makes sense and the material CMA chose to produce, in the context it
shows to produce it, only created more questions than it answered.
Q:\wp51\Mollie\37096-37464
Plaintiffs do not point to this as a particularly "egregious" deletion. On the
other hand, it is as good as an example as any of the CMA's abuse of its
right to redact relevant information.
CMA concealed the reference to the board "adding a general council to
the MCA staff. Despite the strength of the present staff support, we
welcome this and, being pushy, hope the time will come when the
environmental lawyer is also hired." (CMA 37243).
In a similar vein, CMA concealed its Water Resources Committees'
references to the quality of the "legal services to environmental committees:
"In which the Committee wished to point out that for some time, the Water
Resources Committee has been concerned about the uncertainty and
irregularity of the legal council it received in the course of its business. It is
particularly important that an attorney familiar with environmental law review
comments that are prepared by an EPA Technical Committee for submittal to
CMA in response to regulatory proposals are in discussion of EPA's program
strategies. Several years ago, in an attempt to provide such service, the
MCA Board authorized the establishment of the Joint Subcommittee of the
Environment Law (JSEL)..." ...However, other demand member companies'
attorneys time, this does not resolve the problem..." (CMA 37252). CMA
concealed the concern of its Water Resources Committee with a level of
funding for its scientific studies (they are practically begging for $15,000.)
CMA concealed its description of the EPA administrator Russell Train
as having "a strong environmentalist leaning which affected agency policy,
although in Rein by the recognition of economic realities by others in the Ford
and Nixon administrations. We fear that there may not be an equal
restraining influence on President Carter..." (CMA 37255).
CMA concealed its staffs reports boasting of the "conspicuous role" it
played in responding to EPA's strategy document "assessment and control of
chemical problems" at public meetings attended by 400 participants, nearly
all representatives of industry, in Washington, on March 22-23." (CMA
37256). CMA concealed that "MCA has emphasized again the chemical
long-standing position that some provisions of the Clean Air Act of 1970 are
'rapidly leading our nation to untimely and overly restrictive limitations on
industrial strength' and George Polzer again presented the association views
before a Congressional unit, this time on March 11th to members of the
Subcommittee of Environment on the Health State and Foreign Commerce
Committee..." (CMA???) Considering amendments to the Clean Air Act of
1970. George Polzer has presented testimony "before the Senate in
February." [Who is this George Polzer, who has "presented the associations'
views" on the amendments to the CAA of 1970.] (CMA 37257).
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
MCA "expressed concern...that naming certain contaminants in the bill
effectively judges the need for controls and that 'all elements of doubt will
be resolved in favor of control, whether or not hearings and studies
demonstrate an affirmative need for them." (CMA 37257).
CMA endorsed the TASA language "will not cause or significantly
contribute an unreasonable risk to public health" ..."regarding zero risks and
risks/benefit." CMA says it is "less than 1-8th of the problem" caused by
hydrocarbon emissions, as opposed to "motor vehicles and fuel marketing."
"Two percent additional investment by 1990" would not be intolerable."
CMA doesn't support the "Rooney Amendment" which place
"primarily responsibility on the state for granting variances for expansion or
new construction in areas where the national standard is being exceeded"
because MCA felt "the amendment could be interpreted as requiring trade­
offs." (CMA 37258). CMA announced on April 5th, supplementing it
2/17/77 testimony before the NAC on OSHA, "MCA said the chemical
industry is dedicated to protecting its workers from known hazards. On the
other hand, we held that occupational cancer 'is not the major public health
spectre some have suggested.' 'Cancer is a complex subject,' we pointed
out. 'Qualified experts see the subject in perspective, and through
perspective we believe the problem and its reduction can be addressed
CMA wants "a committee of cancer experts" to study the "available
facts" and "scientific/medical guidelines for use by OSHA in this area"
composed from academia, industry, labor, toxicology groups and
government.
CMA opposed generally applicable regulations and wants its panel of
"qualified experts." "Each chemical must be addressed on a case-by-case
The third thing the CMA recommended that OSHA include in "a new
proposal for guidelines regulating carcinogens in the work place" was the use
of "performance rather than specific routes to desired performance," i.e. if
performance standards. (CMA 37258).
MCA's support for "OSHA's 'ABC' Plan for Work Place Safety" which
would use incentives on grade "B" companies and concentrate their
enforcement efforts on grade "A" companies, consisting of those found to
have ineffective programs." (CMA 37259).
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
5/10/77 - (CMA 12593-12594 and 37262-37296) - MCA Board of
Directors Meeting Minutes.
(Last time "CMA concealed" is used unless I specifically say it)
CMA concealed TASA implantation Richard E. Heckert, the Senior
Advisor to the Executive Committee on TASA. Heckert was to meet with
ERA administrator Costle to discuss the "tendency to over-regulate ...as well
as to emphasize the limited availability of testing facilities to conduct
toxicological evaluation." (CMA 37265).
CMA concealed their report of their director on Government Relations.
(CMA 37265 and 37276-285): "Heated battles...took place in both House
and Senate over rules which will apply to the expansion of industrial facilities
in areas where air quality does not meet national health standards." CMA
refers to its "effort to set aside the EPA 'trade off policy,' a broadly
supported business effort...mounted in both committees" of the House and
Senate which were considering those rules. (CMA 37283).
"Concern was expressed by subcommittee members (Senate
Commerce Subcommittee on Science) that Costle has not requested
sufficient funding to properly administer the law..." In his request to the
appropriation authorizations on EPA (29 million for 1978 and 50 million for
1979), prior to having left his position in the EPA, the previous EPA
Administrator Tran has asked for 52 million for 1978 instead of 29 million.
CMA discusses the proposed amendment to TSCA to establish Toxic
Substances Injury Assistance Act whose sponsor (Senator Griffin) feels
"...that the Federal and State levels of governments should respond to
chemical contamination as much as they do in cases of natural disasters.
However, Costle in the Environmental Organization supported a concept of
involving funds contributed by the manufacturers." CMA does not say
whether it opposed or supported this legislature. (CMA 37284).
The Insurance Committee reported to the board that "to put it simply,
The Liability Market is in a state of utter chaos..." CMA suggests "giving
serious consideration to assuming more of the risks, coupled with 'in-house'
risk management discipline procedures to control losses. The name of the
game continues to be loss prevention." (CMA 37286).
The chairman of the Insurance Committee says he is "hopeful that
CMA will be able to influence legislature to the benefit of the chemical
industry" with regard to product liability "legislative reform" activities. (CMA
37287)
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
The CMA refers to its "finalization of a Loss Data Bank" which the
Insurance Committee has been creating for the last five years and which
contain "statistics and pertinent information on property losses." ...Under
stewardship of MCA to provide uniformity of reporting in confidentiality...
CMA concealed its staff report, including the reference to its principle
concern: "Improved definition and interpretation of air quality standards,
limits on industrious expansion in areas failing to obtain health standards, no­
growth implications of federally-enforced policy of non-deterioration, and
relief from certain flexible statutory compliance deadlines." The Bentsen
Amendment would allow exceptions in non-attainment areas "under certain
conditions." (CMA 37295). The CMA learns that OSHA has announced a
one ppm ETS, down 10 eight-hour TWA, lowering the ceiling from 25 to 5
ppm eliminating "the peak level of 50 ppm for a 1 5 minute period during the
eight-hour day" under the prior standard. (CMA 37295). Dr. Bingham
promised work on developing a permanent standard which would be
complete in six months. (CMA 37295).
CMA concealed that it "arranged 56 television interviews and 72
radios interviews with 16 member companies' representatives at this
American Women in Radio and Television Convention..." and "interviewed
ten industry representatives," and sent 1000 copies "of these interviews...to
extension home economists around the country for use on their local radio
37295). Ninety-three percent of the 600 people attending the American
Women in Radio and Television Convention "visited MCA's
suite...Convention attendees in our suite was the most popular of all." (CMA
37295).
CMA concealed its discussion of "suggestion made some months ago
that consideration be given to merging SOCMA (Society of Organic's
Chemicals Manufacturer Association), identified in plaintiffs discovery into
MCA. This matter having been studied jointly by the MCA Executive
Committee and SOCMA Board, a merger has been abandoned for the
present. Instead, closer liaisons is to be maintained through cross-visitation
meetings of the official bodies of the two organizations." (CMA 37265).
William J. Driver discussed his meeting with a CEFIC Delegation ("European
Council of Chemicals Manufacturers Federations") and discussions included
"governmental regulation of air and water pollution control and toxic
CMA again concealed any reference to its environmental management
survey, here, in fact, the response to the request for the survey information
Q:\wp51 \MoHie\37096-37464
has been "disappointing" with only 89 companies submitting data which
compared to 1 30 "in a similar survey two years ago" [in which survey results
have also been concealed]. (CMA 37266).
CMA concealed its discussion of "OSHA Cancer Policy Proposal" and
MCA's having written the NAS on OSH "urging the establishment of a
Review Committee of cancer experts from academia, government, labor,
toxicology, and industry groups..."
6/8/77 - (CMA 12595-12596 and 37298-37307 - MCA Board of Directors
Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed the meeting schedule of its Board of Directors of
1977-78, which refers to meetings every month except July and August
with all meetings taking place in Washington, D.C., except three in exotic
locations. (CMA 37300). CMA concealed its liaison with SOCMA and the
fact that the E.P. Blanchard, the President of SOCMA, was in attendance in
the meeting and that the CMA's George F. Polzer reported on his attendance
at recent SOCMA board meetings and having "responded enthusiastically,
saying that closer liaisons should identify opportunities for complimentary
action and that he would be pleased to continue to represent MCA and
fostering this relationship." (CMA 37300).
CMA concealed the fact that virtually all its "non-budgeted funds and
meetings" involved vinyl chloride or other chlorinated hydrocarbon research
(with a few exceptions, like phosgene, fluorocarbons, and benzene.) (CMA
37303). The second version (July, 1996) or CMA 12596)
MCA moved to intervene in the API's suit requesting review of
OSHA's ETS for benzene issued April 29th. (CMA 37307).
9/13/77 (CMA 12597-12598 and 37309-37332)- MCA Board of Directors
Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed its policy on lobbying reform (CMA 37311 and
37320) which "would require substantial changes in reporting, record
keeping and disclosures in funding sources in such a manner as to raise
serious questions for trade associations and their members." (CMA 37320).
The CMA wants to make sure that any new legislature at least it is limited to
Congress and not to the Executive Branch or "grass-roots" lobbying activities
and specifically that it "not require the compulsory disclosure of trade
association membership and dues information..." (CMA 37320). [Of course,
CMA would budget huge amounts of money to various public relations and
scientific efforts as well as direct lobbying activities.]
Q:\wp51\Mollie\37096-37464
CMA concealed the existence of its Chemical Regulation Advisory
Committee, Industrial Relations Advisory Committee, Insurance Committee,
and Public Relations Committee (CMA 37319). This is not an isolated
incident. The CMA consistently concealed every reference to these
committees and their activities throughout the documents it produced in this
case.
The CMA concealed the report of its Government Relations Committee
(CMA 37321-326), including its reference to proposed labor reform bills,
"LOBBYING REFORM BILLS, WHICH COULD SHARPLY AFFECT THE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY..." (emphasis in the original.)
CMA concealed its alliance with the NAM and the United States
Chamber of Commerce in "rallying to seek enactment of legislation which
would correct the inadequacies of the present lobbying laws without placing
the reasonable constraints and burdensome requirements on organizations
and individuals wishing to communicate with members of Congress..." The
The CMA concealed the fact that the president (here, William J.
Driver) of the CMA may himself "approve" studies which are "conducted
under the subscribed special projects program being administrated by MCA."
Here, no VCM related project was discussed (although an EDC project is
discussed); however, because of the systematic manner CMA redacted
relevant information which would allow a reader to understand the context of
"unredacted information," unless I read CMA 37327 or any similar staff
report. They all were redacted of the information which reveals this relevant
information as to how "special projects program" such as the MCA
administered vinyl projects operate, specifically the vinyl panel. The CMA
concealed its president's report of CMA's refinement of its "views on
confidentiality as this issue is involved in Section 8" of TASA and its
reference to a "task force composed of members of the Chemical Regulations
Advisory and Technical Information Retrieval Committees" which would
address the confidentiality" issues, including simply using "total volume of
production" as "acceptable" method of "inventory reporting," etc.
CMA concealed its having told the EPA considering inadequate
methodology used to develop the preliminary list that will be used to develop
the first priority list of fifty substances to be scrutinized under the Toxic
Substance Control Act," etc. (CMA 37331).
Q:\wp51\Mollie\37096-37464
10/11/77 (CMA 12599-12600) - MCA Board of Directors Meeting Minutes.
Dr. Ula Bingham "will address the next MCA chemical forum"
(11/1/77) and CMA recognized that OSH A activities "are of a continuing
interest to the chemical industry, and Dr. Bingham's appearance especially
timely in view of OSHA's recently proposed generic standards for
carcinogencity..." publishing of the Federal Registry on October 4,h. (CMA
37350).
CMA concealed the staff report of its president. (CMA 37351-355).
CMA concealed its submission of a "long document" to OSHA on
9/22/77 stating, "that there is no substantial evidence of record to support
the proposed conclusion that the health and safety of employees will be
enhanced by changing the standard from 10 ppm/25ppm to 1ppm/5ppm"
and if there is "no evidence that leukemia has resulted from exposure to
benzene at the current concentration limits.." With the regulations described
as representing "an intolerable misallocation of economic resources" which
"would not improve safety in the work place, but would merely elevate a
declaration of policy to a position superior to a scientific evidence which
Congress has determined to be the primary basis for the formulation of the
CMA concealed MCA's having "protested to the Environmental
Protection Agency the efforts to limit the emissions of vinyl chloride even
further are unreasonable" and refers specifically to a letter written by Driver
[also not produced to my knowledge] to EPA on 9/22/77 stating "that
member companies have grave concerns about EPA's zero risks/zero
emission approach to regulation, seeing it as an apparent departure from the
intent of Congress for reasonably acting on the Clean Act Amendments of
1977" and further that "there is no compelling evidence to act now"
"CMA (who defeated jurisdiction in the vinyl chloride conspiracy case
a few years later) reports that more than 1 50 people took part in MCA's
annual 'workshop on safety and health in the chemical industry' in New
Orleans last month." (CMA 37354). CMA also concealed that Dr. Bingham,
Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health, Department of
Labor, would speak at the Chemical Forum on 11/1/77 at Washington Hilton.
(CMA 37355)
Q:\wp51\Mollie\37096-37464
11/21/77 (CMA 12601-12602 and 37356-37383) - CMA Board of Directors
Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed the participation of SOCMA (E.P. Blanchard, E.l. du
CMA concealed the proposed rules of organization and procedure for
the Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee (CRAC). (CMA 37359).
Although CMA agreed that these minutes were not confidential years
ago, it continues to defy the court's orders not to redact irrelevant
information from responsive documents, here, a large section of the
discussion of the Technical and Functional Committee reports it received
[and which are not attached (and which CMA has not produced anyway),
including technical committees on such matters as air quality, chemical
packaging, education activities, government relations, insurance, labels and
precautionary information, etc.] (CMA 37359-360).
CMA concealed its discussion of its "Risks/Benefit Analysis" which
"highlighted carcinogencity as the crucial current problem relating to
risk/benefit analysis, with resolution of the threshold concept being vital for
understanding." (CMA 37361).
CMA concealed the fact that what later came to be known as the
American Industrial Health Council (AIHC) began its existence as an "inter­
industry task group for a rational cancer policy" and that the chairman of this
committee was on the CMA Board of Directors. (CMA 37362). The purpose
of AIHC is to "bring rationality to OSH A regulations concerning cancer." The
activities of the AIHC are specifically identified as being the result of "a joint
effort with MCA, SOCMA and other trade associations as well as numerous
individual companies and various industries participating." SOCMA provided
staff support, and the firm Cleary, Gottliebe, Steen, Apersand, and Hamilton
have been retained as legal council. The CMA concealed the "cooperative
and constructive relationship with OSHA." He stressed this following his
discussion of a visit he made to OSHA Administrator Dr. Ula Bingham. (CMA
37362).
The AIHC was charged "to develop a list of suspected commercial
carcinogens" as well as "information that will assist a company to assess the
impact of regulatory action on its own operations, and information that will
help companies to prepare to testify." (CMA 37362).
CMA concealed the report its board of directors received from 104
member companies responding to surveys which indicate product liability "to
be a problem in respect to chemical manufacturing.." but "was not shown
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
to be a major one as it is the case for machinery manufacturers or those
engaged in supplying consumer products." [emphasis supplying] (CMA
37362).
"The Committee is reserving judgment on Workmen's Compensation
Law as the sole remedy since that surely would be very expensive." (CMA
37362).
CMA concealed that its Board of Directors received reports from CUT
(Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology), here represented by "Mr.
Fleming," its Chairman, who introduced Dr. Goldberg, CIIT's president "who
spoke of the Institute's objectives and progress in toxicological testing of
widely distributed basic chemicals, research and test methods in
interpretation of data, and training of toxicologists" and that all this
toxicology testing was "being supported by 29 companies with a three-year
commitment (1978-80) totaling 20 million dollars" and building a staff of 75.
(CMA 37363). Plaintiffs discovery, the various court orders, and plaintiffs
subpoena clearly and specifically requested information with regard to
contacts between CMA and CUT.
CMA concealed that, except for a well-budgeted industry wide
benzene study, the entire budget for CMA Research relates to vinyl or
plastics (BCM, VDC, Styrine, Acryiloniterile, Trichlorethylene, EDC,
Chlorbenzne, Epichilorohydrin, Phthalate, Esters, Epoxy Resins??, and
Titanium Dioxide. CMA 12602, CMA's original production and CMA 37366
CMA also concealed the entire "Plastic's Group Financial Package"
CMA concealed the rules of organization and procedure of CRAC
(CMA 37368-372) which coordinated the activities of various CMA panels
CMA knew plaintiffs knew about. However, CMA knew plaintiffs did not
know about the Chemical Relations Advisory Committee of the CMA (CRAC)
whose stated purposes included advising the board "concerning the testing
and regulatory control of chemicals at the point of manufacturer identified
with potential hazards to health and the environment..." and to "formulate
and advocate chemical industry positions... cooperate with other MCA
committees, and promote exchange of information within the chemical
industry, with trade and professional associations, and with all levels of
government regarding good practices in controlling chemical hazards. (CMA
37368).
CMA concealed that membership in this committee was limited to
candidates whose "duties for his employer... include formulation of policies
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
and direction of programs related to toxic substances control through
research, quality control, product development, occupational environmental
safety or allied function." (CMA 37368).
CMA concealed the existence of the "General Principles Applicable to
the Structure and Operations of Committee" which "prescribes" the
"responsibilities" of the Secretary, the MCA Staff Representative assigned to
each CMA committee. (CMA 37370). CMA still has not produced this
"General Principles" document and, in fact, systematically concealed the
existence of the organizational structure in which the pertinent CMA
activities occurred. The original date of this document appears to have been
March 12, 1963, with subsequent amendments (CMA 37372).
CMA concealed the report of its Government Relations Committee
(CMA 37374-379), including discussions of TSCA amendments with "MCA
activity in this area... under way in the Legal Advisory Subgroup" of CRAC
and that "CRAC intends to prepare a position paper for use on the Hill."
CMA concealed the existence of its Washington Environmental
Coordinating Committee, here being informed of problems of CRAC with
proposed TSCA amendments (CMA 37376).
CMA concealed its staff report (CMA 37380-383), including its
expectation that OSHA would "issue its permanent standard sometime
between Thanksgiving and middle of December" for benzene and its
awareness that EPA, regulating benzene under Section 112 of the Air Quality
Control Act, and that it had issued three documents on Ambient Air
Distribution of Emissions and Risks to Human Health (CMA 37380).
CMA concealed its agreements with the Franklin Institute Research
Laboratories (FIRL) "to provide MCA information necessary for updating
safety data sheets and determining whether, in a particular instance [for
example, SD-56, which despite industry pledge to reissue in 1974 wouldn't
see the light of day for years, if it ever did], a Safety Data Sheet would be
temporarily withdrawn from distribution pending revision..." (CMA 37381)
The CMA recognizes that there is only "approximately 100 chemicals we
have published a safety data sheet" to begin with. (CMA 37381). CMA
concealed the existence of "plastics waste management" it first describes as
having been "published in 1 970" and the existence of "flammability testing
of polymers" whose date is not given (CMA 37381).
CMA concealed very relevant information pertaining to its knowledge
and understanding of "notification of substantial risks under Section 8 (e)" of
TSCA [this is directly relevant to the Buse Audit of IBT discussed at the
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
emergency session of the VCRC in 1980 where Ed Frost discussed CMA
lawyers having "gone through the files" of CMA following discussion of
document which "might sink the CMA."] CMA's position as the concealed
portion reveals it expressed to EPA was that Section 8 (e) of TSCA will
cause inefficient over reporting [!] of information to the agency and cause
serious internal difficulties for the chemical industry...," which, unlike the
ridiculous prediction of "inefficient over reporting," actually may have
occurred since fraudulent under reporting under TSCA did in fact create
"serious internal difficulties for the chemical industry..." which, at least in
the vinyl, was resolved "internally" through knowing violation of TSCA ad 8
(e) provisions as only a small part of its "internal difficulties" in complying
with the law or any requirement that it reported significant or true
information with regard to toxicity to anyone. (CMA 37382).
1/10/78 (CMA 12603-12604 and 37385-37404) - MCA Board of Directors
Meeting Minutes.
CMA concealed its introduction of Mr. Frost "who joined the
association's staff as General Council on January 9, 1978." Other
information indicates he was or became a vice-president as well. The
activities of Mr. Frost were relevant to this litigation and CMA knew it long
before it started producing documents.
CMA concealed the board of directors consideration of "public attitude
toward the chemical industry" in which a consultant discussed "findings of a
deteriorated public attitude toward chemicals and chemical manufacturers
which he related principally to concerns about health." (CMA 37386). CMA
concealed both the existence and the activities of its special committee on
product liability and continues to remain in contempt the court's order that it
produce unredacted copies of these documents. The same survey of MCA
members, which showed product liability was not a problem for the chemical
industry, was also concealed in previous documents (e.g., board minutes
11/21/77 at CMA 37362). Here, CMA continues to conceal information in
these minutes which they stipulated were not confidential years ago,
redacting (even in its most recent production) information on the grounds
that portions of the information in these admittedly non-confidential
documents are somehow "privileged"; which, by the way, inconsistent with
every previous ruling of the court addressing minutes. Not one privilege
claim with regard to meeting minutes has been upheld and CMA's continued
"redacted" of these documents can only be considered in direct contempt of
the court's prior orders. (CMA 37387).
Consistent with its prior pattern, CMA concealed that it, using
"commitments from 63 companies" was bankrolling the AIHC to the tune
$1,081,000 just leading up to the "OSHA proposal for generic regulation of
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
carcinogens" (CMA 37388). Mr. Berker "urged all testimony of the hearings
in the belief that it will add significally to the impact of written statements."
CMA has still not produced relevant reports from its Technical and
Functional Committees (CMA 37388-389) which "were distributed in
advance with the tentative agenda" which, unlike, many others of the most
recent versions of the minutes (September, 1996) is not preceded by a copy
of the agenda (see, for example, the agenda for the previous board meeting
for 11/21/77.) (CMA 37356). Whereas much relevant information has been
found in the reports of the Technical and Functional Committees, including
some of these, such as Government Relations Committee, Industrial
Relations Advisory Committee, Legal Advisory Committee, and even the
Occupational Health Committee. The absence of these reports corresponds
with their distribution along with the agenda. There is no reason that they
shouldn't have been produced here as well just because they were sent in
advance of the meeting instead of distributed at the meeting. In fact, they
are incorporated into the minutes in the exactly the same way they are when
the reports are attached to the minutes. CMA has used the fact that
"summaries of recent meetings of the following committees were distributed
in advance with the tentative agenda" to conceal them, which they
apparently have given up doing to some extent when the documents were
actually "attached" to the minutes, instead being distributed in advance of
them. (CMA 37388. Also see evidence of similar concealment within
11/21/77 board meeting minutes at CMA 37360, etc.)
CMA concealed the board's approval of "continuation of a multicomponent study of vinyl chloride at the University of Louisville." (CMA
37404)
"Other likely reform items would permit deduction of only 50% of cost
of business-related meals and eliminate deductibility country club dues paid
2/14/78 (CMA 12605-12606 and 37406-37443) - MCA Board of Directors
Meeting Minutes.
MCA concealed the appointment of E. B. Frost as an MCA Vice
President: "Mr. Driver's appointment of Mr. Frost (General Council) as a Vice
President of the association was approved." (CMA 37407). CMA concealed
the Special Review Committee report and all references to the report (CMA
37407-408 and Exhibit B: CMA 37415-37439) "on three prior occasions1957, 1962, and 1968, Board level examinations of the objectives,
structure, and program of the Association have been conducted by formal
study to assist MCA's fitness and performance with respect to services and
effective action on industries behalf..." (CMA 37415).
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
Observations included that "because overwhelming legislative,
regulatory, and society pressures, MCA staff backup, particularly for the
Technical and Functional Committee work, is often hampered by lack of
decisive responsiveness and timely support." (CMA 37415).
"Although in some instances there is a specific need [emphasis
applied] for review by council, there is a tendency to request council to
review and make recommendations rather than first develop technical
information [emphasis applied] and recommend positions for presentation to
an agency or legislative body, resulting in delay of needed evaluation." (CMA
37416).
There is reference to the strong feelings "some members of the MCA"
have about "a more aggressive advocacy role" for this CMA "especially
regarding regulation and questions." (CMA 37416).
CMA concealed the changes in its committee structure effective
6/1/78, which, if accomplished, consolidated the previous Air Quality, Solid
Waste Management, and Water Resources Committees into a new
"Environmental Management Committee; Labels and Precautionary
Information, Occupational Health, Safety and Fire Protection Committees
consolidated into a single Occupational and Health Committee; and Chemical
Packaging, Transportation and Distribution, Transportation Equipment
Committees, consolidated into a single "Distribution" committee. The
dissolution of the "Public Relations" and "Education Activities" committees,
with their previous functions to be conducted " within staff on a
maintenance basis and with Executive Committee for special PR projects..."
as well as the dissolution of the "Legal Advisory" Committee which,
similarly, would "continue through MCA in House General Council and
designated Executive Committee Member's corporate staffs. The Industrial
Relations Advisory Committee was discontinued and the Plastics Committee
was finally discontinued. (CMA 37418). Especially, considering the courts
long-expressed desire that CMA, and other defendants, provide their
information, primarily, of production of documents, CMA has consistently
concealed this sort of relevant, almost essential information relating to its
CMA committee structure and operation. (CMA 37417-418).
All Technical and Functional Committees appointments, including the
chairman, go through the Executive Committee, on the recommendation of
the president. From the Executive Committee, each Technical and Functional
Committee appointment goes to the Board for ratification. (CMA 37418).
CMA concealed that the CMA vinyl panels membership which often
exceeded "fifteen in number" was against the general rule and must have
Q:\wp51\Mollie\37096-37464
been determined by the Executive Committee to be an advisable exception.
"This says that the term of individual committee members was to be
limited to three years! (CMA 37419). With one-third of the membership
rotated annually." (CMA 37419).
Despite the clarity of plaintiffs allegations and the clear relevance of
MCA modification of its "advocacy role" as a result of board action to allow
increased adequacy on TSCA, (CMA 37420 and 37422), these documents
clearly show CMA's intention to step up its advocacy efforts. "MCA should
take an active role in implantation process of TSCA which EPA was to
shortly undertake. CMA concealed CRAC was, which monitored CMA's
Technical Committees, was created "in furtherance of this [advocacy] role."
("Furtherance of this role, a newly constituted Chemical Regulations Advisory
Committee [CRAC]), is to be primarily concerned with the development of
regulations implanting TSCA" and to "assist" EPA in its implementation of
TSCA.
Although MCA claims to stand by its previous "policy" (followed only
when it suited them) to avoid "questions involving a particular... chemical
substance," things have changed now and: "Nevertheless, should a
proposed regulation involve a precedent-setting or first-impression principle,
or for other special reasons, may be important for MCA to take a position."
MCA concealed its official position that "MCA advocacy does not
restrict the independence of MCA member companies," which is relevant
because it is a lie. MCA advocacy does, in fact, restrict the independence
of MCA member companies and documents produced in this case prove it.
The CMA concealed its reference to the "sharp rebuke" which the
house "handed the administration, Ralph Nader, and Congressional
leadership" by voting down the proposed Consumer Protection Agencies Bill
which would create a separate department of consumer advocacy in
proceedings before other agencies, and empowered to appeal agency
regulatory decisions. (CMA 37426). This bill had been before Congress in
one form or another for eight years. A similar bill passed the House during
the Ford administration by 344 to 44. The reason for this "turnaround" is
stated to have been " the massive lobbying effort in opposition which was
mounted by the business community" as well as "evidence of a back-lash
resentment against Ralph Nader and his tactics, wherein he was sharply
critical of Congressmen who are undecided, and especially so when they
happened to be former allies." (CMA 37426).
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
CMA concealed the relevant activities of the end of the existence of
its "Legislative Communication Programs," including the reference to the
survey of 107 responding companies showing 2,381,079 employees,
4,598,338 stock holders, 391,013 retirees, etc., (CMA 37431) and
discusses "specific efforts" to various employers were made or weren't
making "to inform employees, stockholders, and retirees about pending
legislative issues and the potential impact on the company." (CMA 37432).
Lobbying activities are described in great detail (CMA 37429-439), including
references to company organization of PAC's, "computer data banks or other
retrieval systems which might be useful tools in grass root communication
programs...," etc. (CMA 37438). CMA concealed its staff report (CMA
37440-443), including the president's having written OSHA that the
"proposed OSHA standard on the identification of chemical substances
would place this incredible burden on all U.S. industry and the U.S. public."
CMA gave EPA preliminary information from Foster D. Snell, the study
of the emissions from facilities producing or using benzene, which is reported
to have been "approximately one-half of those reported to the Advisory
Committee in the Stanford Research Institute study." (CMA 37441).
"The Guide for the Preparation of Safety Data Sheets is now available
in a new edition, its sixth revision," despite the relevance of SD-56 to
plaintiffs allegations and discovery, subpoenas, etc. All copies of this Guide
and all references to it were concealed by CMA. (CMA 37442).
Consistent with prior practice, CMA concealed information showing
that the AIHC was the child of industry and that its "proposed 'alternatives'
concerning regulation of carcinogens appear to be receiving serious
consideration..." by OSHA and labor. (CMA 37409).
CMA has again concealed the reports of the Technical and Functional
Committees which "were distributed in advance of the tentative agenda..."
3/16/78 - (CMA 12607-12608 and 37445-37464) - MCA Board
Meeting Minutes.
Consistent with its prior practices, CMA concealed its discussion of
the AIHC and its large budget: "Originally AlHC's purposed solely to the
OSHA proposal for generic regulations carcinogen. A poll of its supporting
companies has approved broading the scope to apply to carcinogens in the
work place which regulatory body is involved." (Amended 4/11/78 replacing
the phrase "carcinogen in the work place" with "generic cancer policies.")
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
CMA concealed the report of its Government Relations Committee
(CMA 37447 and 37454-460), including discussion of the "Chemical Injury
Indemnity Program" discussed at the TSCA hearings and MCA appearances
on panels, etc.
CMA concealed its staff report (CMA 37461-464) discussing MCA's
appearance at hearings on the proposed generic carcinogen regulations,
CMA concealed references to CRAC's having developed TSCA
workshops (CMA 37463), CMA's intervention in the API's appeal of the
OSHA benzene standard (CMA 37462).
CMA concealed its reference to its submission of "a final report of an
epidemiological study of the mortality of workers and workers employed in
the production of vinyl chloride and its polymers. The report covers the
investigations from June 15, 1973 through December, 1977. The research
covers 10,173 workers from 37 plants and the contractor indicated that
CMA concealed its support of a "tax-exempt organization" called the
American Council on Science and Health founded by Dr. Elizabeth M.
Wheelan, "author of 'Panic in the Pantry' and other books which take a
reasoned approach to chemicals and to be risk/benefit concept..." The
scientists at ACSH "fifteen at present, are deeply concerned that emotion is
replacing science in governmental and public decisions and are pledged to
speak out when fallacy or emotion replaces fact in their specialties. ACSH is
being pinched for funds, but in the interest of independence and credibility
will not accept support from any chemical company or any company in
which could even remotely be concerned with the aims of the council."
However, CMA concealed that Dr. Wheelan "would be happy to hear from
you" if "you are [a member of the board of directors of the Chemical
Manufacturers Association] interested in the work of the council and know of
possible sources of funds, such as foundations..." (CMA 37464).
Q:\wp51 \Mollie\37096-37464
I
Exhibit B
Report of the Pension Committee
to the
Board of Directors
November 22, 1976
Pursuant to its responsibility concerning non*salary benefits for
the Association's staff, the Pension Committee recommends approval of
the following:
(1) Adjuatmeht of Pension Payments to Retirees
Two years
ago, when the Pension Plan was revised, the principle of periodic adjust­
ment of pension payments to past retirees in recognition of increased
cost of living was accepted.
Since then, pension payments to former Federal employees
have increased by nearly 18%, of which 15% was occasioned by rise in the
Consumer Price Index.
It is proposed to increase pension payments by 4% per year
in retirement since 12/1/74, the date of the only prior adjustment. This
would amount to 8% for the five retirees and one surviving spouse who
were then receiving benefits, and lesser percentages for the five employees
who retired between 4/1/75 and 10/1/76.
The amortized annual cost of the proposed adjustment approxi­
(2) Term Life Insurance Coverage for Future Retirees
For
employees, MCA now provides term life insurance coverage of two times
annual salary, but no continuation in retirement. The option to convert
at personal expense is unattractive because of the high cost of attained-age
premium. Continuation is not uncommon, however, but usually on a re­
duced and declining scale.
It is proposed to provide term life insurance for members of
the staff retiring from MCA on or after December 1, 1976 as follows,
designed for family protection rather than as an estate factor:
For any MCA retiree who completed seven years
of service, of which at least five during the tenye^r period immediately preceding retirement
were continuous, and who’has legal dependents
at death:
Amount equal to final annual salary, subject
to a minimum of $10, 000 and a maximum of
$25, 000 for the first two years in retirement;
CMA 037106
f
2
Amount equal to 50% of final salary, subject
to a minimum of $5, 000 and a maximum of
$12,500, for the third, fourth, and fifth years
in retirement; and
$2, 000 after the fifth year in retirement.
For any other MCA retiree who completed three years
of service and who has legal dependents at death:
Amount equal to 50% of final salary subject to
for the first five years in retirement; and
$2, 000 after the fifth year in retirement.
For any other MCA retiree:
At the maximum benefit level ($25, 000 first two years) and at
current rate quotations, the peak cost of about $1,235 per individual would
occur in the second year of retirement (age 66). Overall cost from age 65
through age 79 would total about $6, 600.
MCA has five employees whose normal retirement dates occur
between April 1977 and November 1981. Assuming all at the maximum
benefit level, annual cost would begin at about $1,150 in the current year
' and build to about $4, 000 in fiscal year 1981-82.
(3) Partial Substitution of Ordinary Life for Term Life Insurance
The cost of life insurance provided to an employee in excess of $50, 000
coverage is supplemental income taxable to the employee. At higher salary
levels, the two-times-salary term life insurance benefit provided by MCA
imposes a considerable tax outlay.
IKS allows for a combination of term and ordinary life insurance
under which the insurance company allocates the premium between the two.
The imputed cost of any excess above $50, 000 term plus the cost of the
ordinary life is taxable income to the individual. Advantage lies in a level
premium for the ordinary life portion at the starting age. making it more
attractive for personal continuation on retirement, plus the accumulation
of cash value.
It is proposed to divide the coverage equally between ordinary
life and term for employees at or above the $35, 000 salary level, namely,
continue with one times salary of term and substitute the second one tim s
CMA 037107
salary with ordinary life. The estimated aggregate of increased cost to
the several employees that would qualify --at their current salary levels -is about $9,800 to the time of retirement, whereas the aggregate cash value
of their policies at retirement would be about $51,500, contrasting with no
value at all from term insurance at whatever level.
The added cost to MCA in the current year would approach
$6, 000. dropping to less than $4. 000 after retirement of the first employee
who would qualify.
(4) Reduction of Qualifications for Term Life Insurance Coverage
Formerly, there was a linkage in the funding of the pension plan and group
term life insurance, thus making it logical to set the same age and service
qualifications for enrollment. Concurrent with the revision of the pension
plan two years ago, however, the funding arrangements of the two were
separated and became independent of one another.
While it is legal for an age requirement to be stipulated as being
the same as for pension coverage, as MCA now does, it has been learned it
would be illegal to specify an age limitation as such. It is proposed to
eliminate the age requirement (now 25 years) rather than retain it on a
technicality.
Also, the present requirement of one year of service is an un­
usually long qualification period, one to three months being more common.
It is proposed to lower the requirement to three months, this being the
-period now in effect to qualify for MCA's medical benefits.
The cost of these changes would be minimal. There are relative­
ly few below age 25 on the staff, premium rates for the young are low, and
their inclusion has an offsetting effect of lowering the average age of the
covered group. The cost of the reduced service requirement would be
modest, also, considering the low turnover rate among high-salaried em­
ployees.
MCA
CMA 037108
Exhibit F
REPORT BY THE DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
WILLIAM M. STOVER
NOVEMBER 22,
1976
.AW/sttESS LEFT UNFINISHED BUSINESS
The Second Session of the 94th Congress came to an end in the
early morning hours of October 2, its 258 day duration making it the
second shortest Congressional session since 1960. Of the more than
20,000 bills introduced, only about 450 survived to final enactment.
Fifteen bills were vetoed, and four vetoes were overridden.
During
the Second Session the Senate took 688 recorded votes and the House
661, the total of 1,349 being a new record.
Amid the frantic flurry of last-minute activity,
Brills of significance were moved on toward enactment,
Congress also left behind some unfinished business in
bills not completed, bills which are sure to reappear
one form or another.
a number of
but the 94th
the form of
next year in
Among the important new laws written during the closing days
were:
- The Toxic Substances Control Act (PL 94-469), finally became
law after five years of deliberation and controversy, thus
establishing Federal controls over the manufacture, distribution
and use of chemicals.
- Antitrust Enforcement (pl 94-435), survived two Senate fili­
busters and last-ditch House opposition; authorizes states
attorneys general to bring class action type suits on behalf
of citizens; requires large companies to notify government
of planned mergers; strengthens Federal antitrust investigatory
powers.
k
V
- Tax Revision (PL 94-455), was the product of three years work
but fell far short of reforms promised by Democratic congressional leaders; plans for major overhaul of taxation of U.S.
multinational corporations were dropped from the bill, which
in final form extended the investment tax credit for another
four years, increased the minimum tax for business and altered
somewhat the rules for corporate foreign tax credits.
CMA037112
2
expands Federal and state programs
with new authorizations and powers for EPA, a Federal regulatory
program for hazardous wastes, a ban on open dumping within five
years, and authorizations for state and local solid waste
management and research programs.
However, election-year jitters, veto threats, internal squabbles
and the pressure of an abbreviated Congressional session combined to
forestall enactment of a number of other proposals — virtually all
of which are likely to surface again.
These include:
- A bill to provide stricter regulation of lobbying, which died
amid last minute parliamentary manuevering as Congress ad­
journed; Common Cause is a strong advocate, while Nader groups
and the AFL-CIO supported only the House version; business
is apprehensive over the prospect of heavier record-keeping
and reporting requirements; dues paid to trade associations by
corporate members could be subject to public disclosure under
some concepts.
c
- Clean Air Amendments fell victim to a Senate filibuster as the
Session ended; Senator Muskie has blamed the auto industry for
killing the measure and may resist efforts for quick action on
a stretch-out or relaxation of strict mobile emission standards
set to take effect in 1978; the so-called non-attainment and
non-degredation issues were also highly controversial and sure
to be hotly debated in the next Congress.
- Water Pollution legislation died in conference; chief issues
were degree of control over the nation's wetlands, expanded
state authority in developing wastewater treatment facilities
and delay of mid-1977 water quality deadlines for municipalities.
The 95th Congress is expected to take a thorough look at the
entire Federal Water Pollution Control Act, using as a starting
point the report of the President's Commission on Water Quality.
- Natural Gas Deregulation legislation defied attempts to find a
viable compromise although both the House and Senate passed
versions of the bill; no conference was held and the bills
died, thereby continuing the current artificially low regulated
prices, and thus discouraging new exploration and production.
- industrial Reorganization, the so-called Hart bill, never got
beyond the early hearing stages; its chief sponsor, Michigan
Senator Philip A. Hart, is retiring; the measure singles out
chemicals manufacturing and other industries for possible break­
up, creates a special commission to make divestiture investi­
gations and a special court to compel dismantling.
CMA 037113
I
3
_ petroleum Divestiture legislation would have required major
oil companies to separate into single operations for production, refining-marketing, and transportation; another bill
would have forced "horizontal" divestiture, thus keeping oil
companies out of other energy source interests (m though the
"vertical" bill cleared a Senate committee it was never taken
up on the floor.
- corporate Chartering legislation failed to make much headway,
but could arise again; oversight hearings were held in the
Senate Commerce Committee; one concept would require a Federal
charter of corporations, with annual reporting on the makeup
of the board of directors, product line sales and voting stock
ownership.
Among the numerous other bills which failed to achieve Congressional
0r presidential approval were these:
strict controls over strip-mining;
land use controls;
the outlawing of corporate bribes to foreign officials;
common situs picketing in the construction industry;
proposals to create a consumer protection agency;
expanded powers and investigative authority for the Federal
Trade Commission.
CARTER ADMINISTRATION PREPARING TO TAKE OFFICE
Using what pollster Lou Harris called "the old Roosevelt coalition"
as the backbone of his campaign. Governor Jimmy Carter of Georgia
has become president-elect, and is now hard at work on the massive task
of organizing his Administration.
Recent days have seen Mr. Carter
closeted with such Ford Administration notables as George Bush (for
a security briefing) and Henry Kissinger (to talk foreign affairs),
and at 3:30 this afternoon he is in personal conference with President
Ford to discuss the transition of the Government.
Washington bureaucrats, politicians and diplomats are giving
Mr. carter close scrutiny, perhaps motivated by uneasiness and
uncertainty as much as by mere curiosity. After all, Jimmy Carter has
run as an anti-establishment candidate for nearly two years.
He has
criticized both the form and substance of government in Washington,
|s vowed sweeping reforms and new programs, has fought bitter campaign
™&tles with recognized leaders of his own party. ' However, on election
":9ht he made a quick transition from critic on the outside to manager
n the inside.
Jimmy Carter now IS the establishment.
fe
CMA 037114
And therefore he is now confronted with a dilemma of some delicacy,
how to begin to direct and to motivate the people and the mechanisms
he has so recently and soundly castigated.
He must find and appoint
cabinet heads and officeholders with the capacity to make the machinery
of government work, and this would seem to indicate a need for experi­
enced personnel; but at the same time he must avoid the appearance
of making his appointments from the lists of known political figures
and party professionals. He needs new faces, but he also needs the
reliability and depth of background that only experience can provide.
There are signs that a number of Carter appointments may be
revealed relatively soon, so that incoming officials will have maximum
time for planning and coordination with departing officials of the
Ford Administration.
Observers around the world will be carefully
watching these appointments for clues to the attitudes of the Carter
Administration, the influence being wielded by various interest groups
and power-brokers, and for indications as to the political wisdom of
the President-elect himself.
Among the most delicate tasks confronting Mr. Carter, and one he
appears to recognize clearly as such, is the establishing of communica­
tions links with — and hopefully some measure of control over — the
Congress.
His recent meeting with 16 Democratic Congressional leaders
last week at the farm-estate of Georgia Senator Herman Talmadge was
surely an effort to hold out the olive branch and to begin to build
support for key programs.
The discussions were reportedly broad in
nature, touching on matters relating to the strength of the economy
and'reorganization of Government.
Some observers believe, however, that the new President may
encounter considerable difficulty with the Congress, despite the
fact that both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue are now firmly in
Democratic hands. They reason it this way: Congressional leaders
and Committee chairmen, while criticizing the "stalemate government"
of Presidents Nixon and Ford, have obviously enjoyed the indepen­
dence and status which the years of confrontation have produced.
They
have had an important role in punishing one President and in making
his successor appear ineffectual, and are therefore likely to covet
their independence of action.
Moreover, bills and programs delayed
by attention to Watergate or stalled by Ford vetoes are already in
fairly polished form, and are not likely to be dropped readily by
their sponsors in favor of Carter alternatives.
Yet another factor
will be the attitude of the White House itself, and long-time Carter
watchers point out that he adopted a tough, no compromise attitude
toward the Georgia legislature during his term as Governor.
CMA037115
5
MEW PRESIDENT AND HIS VIEWS
Much of official Washington is now speculating on the future
sections of policy and programs in the Carter Administration.
HoWever, from speeches and statements by the President-elect, and
from the Democratic Party Platform itself it is possible to reach
some preliminary judgments.
With respect to the economy. Governor Carter appears firmly in
favor of creating more jobs and providing stimulus to the national
economy. The prospect of a one-shot tax cut is being seriously
discussed. The formation of a national youth corp to hire and train
young people from urban areas is another Carter aim, and is consistent
with bis support for direct job creation with emphasis on public
service employment. He also favors moderate interest rates, continued
support of investment credits, strong anti-trust enforcement and a
strengthening of the Council on Wage and price Stability.
Tax reform,
though a popular topic at the campaign podium, will take considerably
longer to accomplish.
The environment will receive high priority in the Carter Adminisation. The incoming president has opposed extending the compliance
feadlines for automobile exhaust emissions and would apparently retain
the present non-degredation concepts of the Clean Air Act.
He has
called, for strict enforcement of water pollution control laws and
evidently will oppose efforts to weaken the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act.
He supports strict controls over strip mining.
m
National energy policies may undergo some changes under President
Carter with greater emphasis on energy conservation, and a strengthening
of environmental controls over energy production. He plans to deemphasize nuclear development and to require stricter regulation in
construction of new nuclear power plants.
He evidently will push for
increased reliance on domestic coal from the deep mines of Appalachia
and would oppose heavy development of strip-mined coal resources in
the Western United States. He opposes further expansion of Western
coal-leasing and supports strong state participation in offshore oil
lease decisions.
He would favor mandatory mileage standards for
automobiles with economic penalties on those with less fuel efficiency.
He opposes Federal subsidies for synthetic fuel production.
ME 95TH CONGRESS;
NEW FACES. NEW LEADERS. SAME VOTE RATIOS
When the smoke of election day had cleared, the new Congress
koked almost exactly like the old one — th Senate will again be
imposed of 62 Democrats and 38 Republicans, and the House shows a
shift to the Democrats of only two seats, the new ratio being 292-143
in their favor.
CMA 037116
6
On closer inspection, however, the changes will be both numerous
and significant: virtually the entire leadership with change in both
Houses and in both parties; there is a substantial crop of "freshmen",
especially in the Senate; there will be many shifts in key committee
responsibilities; there is talk of major committee realignment in the
Senate.
The House will organize itself in early December, in that Members
will be named to committees, new chairmen will be elected and changes
in House rules and committee jurisdictions will be considered. Not
until the 95th Congress convenes in January, however, will subcommittee
assignments be made, committee rules considered or leadership positions
voted on.
There are 67 new House Members, 47 Democrats and 20 Republicans.
Overall, the election produced overwhelming success for incumbents
with 95 percent of those running being returned to office.
The
strong re-election rate held true for the 79 so-called "Watergate
freshmen", those Democratic Congressmen first elected in the offyear
el ction of 1974. Despite high Republican hopes against that group,
78 ran for re-election and 76 won.
There will be a number of important changes in the chairmanships
of House committees and subcommittees, 28 in all, including new
chairmen for the following:
- Budget Committee (committee 2-year rotation rule)
- The Interior Committee (jurisdiction includes energy matters,
mining)
- International Relations Committee (foreign affairs)
- Merchant Marine and Fisheries (merchant marine matters,
oceanography, coastal zone management)
- Post Office Committee (the postal system)
- Public works and Transportation Committee (water pollution
control, most transportation matters)
- Rules Committee (clearance of legislation for House floor
debate)
Another development worthy of mention is the fact that there are
seven vacancies to be filled on the House Ways and Means Committee
wherein taxation and trade legislation are written.
CMA 037117
I
7
The Senate will also undergo some interesting changes.
Incumbents
didn't fare as well as their House colleagues with only 16 of the 25
Senators running being returned.
The 64 percent re-election rate for
incumbents was the lowest in the history of direct Senate elections.
There will be 18 freshman Senators, counting Governor Wendell Anderson,
who will replace Vice President-elect Mondale.
Ten are Democrats and
eight Republicans.
Three committee chairmen were defeated: Hartke (Veterans Affairs),
Moss (Aeronautics and Space), and McGee (Post Office and Civil Service).
There will be considerable change in the memberships of several
Senate Committees, including Commerce, where there are 7 vacancies
to be filled. Finance (4 vacancies) and Judiciary (5 vacancies).
A further unknown in the Senate is whether or not reorganization
will bring a significant shift in committee jurisdictions and respon­
sibilities. A reorganization proposal in the form of a Senate
Resolution has been drafted by the Committee on Committees headed by
Senator Adlai E. Stevenson, Jr. (D-lll.), and could be taken up early
in 1977. The resolution presents a number of alternatives for
consideration and could eventually lead to elimination of some
committees, and the shifting of important environmental and energy
responsibilities.
CMA 037118
Exhibit G
REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
JOSEPH SANDFORD, JR., CHAIRMAN
CHEMICAL PACKAGING COMMITTEE
NOVEMBER 22,
1976
The activities of the Chemical Packaging Committee
emphasize two major areas - regulations and legislation.
Our
objective today is to provide background on our Committee oper­
ations and how we are assisting each of our companies to achieve
both safety in packaging and regulatory compliance.
Times have changed!
Just a few years ago, a chemical
packaging engineer might be concentrating on the steel thickness
of a drum for solvents, the moisture barrier in a bag for plastic
resins, or a fungicide box closure.
Today, he must also know
about the Transportation Safety Act of 1974, the consolidation
of DOT regulations, the .Metric Conversion Act of 1975, inter­
national shipping regulations, and, looking to the future, reg­
ulations on solid waste disposal and carcinogens.
What has caused this change in our Committee's activ­
ities? We believe the most important factor is the concern on
the part of both the private and public sectors for greater
safety in the packaging, transportation and distribution of haz­
ardous materials.
The Department of Transportation's past two
annual reports on hazardous materials control are more specific
about this concern over safety.
In these two years, 59 fatalities
and over 1,500 injuries occurred in all hazardous materials
incidents of which over 50% involved chemical products.
The De­
partment of Transportation, or as we usually say "DOT", also
lists the ten worst accidents for each year? 70% of these in­
volved chemical industry products with a total of nine fatalities
and 340 people injured.
It is for reasons like this that the
Committee's activities emphasize regulations and legislation.
The major legislative act affecting our activities
is the Transportation Safety Act of 1974, passed by Congress
in early 1975.
Key points include:
The D partment of Transportation's authority is
extended to regulate package unloading, certain
types of storage and shipment routing.
CMA 037119
Procedures for obtaining package exemptions are
made much more complex.
DOT authority is extended to container manufacturers
and even to commodities not presently defined as
hazardous.
Criminal as well as civil penalties can be imposed
for violations with imprisonment for up to five
years now included.
In the regulatory field, DOT has just issued its
complete consolidation of Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations which contains the regulations governing the trans­
portation and packaging of hazardous materials.
This document
has been over four years in preparation and incorporates many
regulatory changes affecting the use, labeling, marking and
shipment of chemical packages.
The Metric Conversion Act has been enacted into law;
it creates a metric board to oversee voluntary conversion in the
United States.
We believe metrication will initially affect our
export packaging with domestic packages going metric over the
next ten years.
Our liaison with Canadian MCA member companies
- is providing valuable input based on their experience in metric
conversion.
Export shipments require industry packaging personnel
to be aware of United Nations and XMCO regulations and appropriate
rail and truck regulations in the various countries to which we
ship.
The regulations of IMCO, or more properly the Intergovern­
mental Maritime Consultative Organization, are contained in an
eight-volume set covering water movement of hazardous materials.
Solid waste disposal legislation recently enacted
has not affected packaging.
However, legislation proposed but
not passed, would have imposed a fee on packaging materials
that are not reusable or recyclable.
Regulations and legislation while deeply involved with
safety also have an economic effect on packaging.
DOT recognizes
this to a degree and has introduced the term "cost/benefit" to be
considered in any reviews of package regulation changes.
Packaging
is a significant cost item in our industry.
The chemical industry
uses over 50 million new and reconditioned steel and fibre drums
annually at a cost of about $500 million.
The industry uses
about seven billion square feet of corrugated fibreboard in boxes
to hold our plastics, agricultural chemicals and acids at an
CMA037120
annual cost of $300 million.
We use some 600 million bags and
15 million pallets a year.
The total annual cost of packaging
materials in our industry approaches $1.5 billion or about 2%
of sales.
Perhaps of equal importance from a solid waste disposal
standpoint, this represents in the range of one billion pounds
of steel, one and a half billion pounds of paperboard and 750
million pounds of wood.
The agendas and organization of the Committee's task
groups and subcommittees reflect our concern over regulations
and legislation.
A few examples illustrate the positive action
we are taking to assist our industry.
First, we recently formed a new regulations and legis­
lation subcommittee to control all of our activities in this
area such as metrication, definitions of hazardous materials,
liaison with DOT and our activities on the intercommittee group
on international regulations.
Our Metrication Task Group coordinates Committee
activity with initial efforts emphasizing proper inclusion of
m trication in DOT regulations, and coordination of differences
in export and domestic regulations.
The Small Packages Subcommittee is developing a tech­
nical bulletin on proper packaging and transportation of samples
and small quantities.
A task group has developed technical bulletins on
proper techniques for loading, bracing and blocking in truck,
rail car and piggyback shipments.
DOT regulations require
safe loading but don't really specify effective techniques.
A newly proposed hazardous materials regulation spec­
ified testing requirements that current acid carboys would not
pass.
A task group worked closely with suppliers to develop a
new carboy design that met all requirements.
A recent change in the definition and test for corrosive
materials meant that drums currently used for products such as
dyes, cleaning compounds or mining reagents were no longer legal.
The Drum Subcommittee coordinated industry input and succeeded
in having a new section added in Title 49 to cover these lower
hazard products and allow continued use of present packages.
CMA 037121
The increasing complexity and many changes in the
regulations created a need for greater awareness on the part of
our employees as well as those in our carrier and distributor
organizations.
The Committee, together with the Transportation
Equipment and Transportation and Distribution Committees, spon­
sored a symposium on hazardous materials regulations with over
1,100 attendees from all concerned shipper and carrier groups.
As to the future, each subcommittee has an active task
group reviewing waste disposal effects on our packages, including
possible reuse and recycle.
The Plastic Drum Task Group recently
sponsored a workshop on plastic drum development with DOT, the
National Bureau of Standards, which is DOT'S contracting agency
on plastic drum developments, and representatives from the Plastic
Drum Institute, the producers' association.
Hopefully, this
joint approach, which we consider to be a significant breakthrough,
will provide the forum for full participation by all groups in
regulations development and application.
In the future, we may
have an entirely new class of hazardous materials to package since
DOT has already indicated they have under development regulations
applying to the proper packaging and transportation of health
products such as carcinogens, mutagens and teratogens.
The Chemical Packaging Committee activities far exceed
- earlier efforts in the design and development of drums, bags or
boxes to safely carry our products.
We must consider the product
itself and any potential health hazard; the package and packaging
' operation to insure we meet DOT regulations; the transportation
and distribution requirements such as proper loading, bracing
and blocking; customers must be able to safely use our packages,
and looking to the future, we must be able to return them or
provide safe reuse or disposal to prevent solid waste problems.
In summary, we believe our responsibility is to assist
the chemical industry to meet all legal requirements while main­
taining a low-risk position in transportation with proper cost/
benefit considerations.
And we intend to make known the position
of our industry on legislative and regulatory matters.
We have emphasized today the effect of regulations
and legislation on packaging.
Actually, the areas covered
affect the entire field of transportation and distribution in
the chemical industry.
Most member companies have active pro­
grams relating to hazardous materials.
Du Pont calls its
CMA 037122
program the "RHYTHM" program, an acronym for Remember How You
Treat Hazardous Materials.
Xn closing, I will show a short film
that was developed to summarize this program.
Although it
emphasizes only one company's efforts, we believe it helps
illustrate the continued need for MCA commitment and involvement
in transportation, distribution and packaging activities.
CMA 037123
Exhibit H
REPORT TO BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS ASSOCIATION
James E. McKee Jr., Chairman
Public Relations Committee
November 22, 1976
Th hazards of holding the same office for two years are obvious.
My position today is not unlike that of a re-elected politician.
It's important to assess what was said to this audience last year!
In 1975, the Public Relations Committee report covered two main
points for future action:
1. That we would focus more sharply on major opportunities as well
as the larger problems of the chemical industry, and
2. That we would establish closer relationships with other functional
areas of MCA so a more meaningful contribution to the industry's
total communications could be made.
These things have been done.
The assaults on the chemical industry by media and government in
the past 12 months have made it imperative.
In addition, the
opportunity to participate in Dr. Heckert's Special Committee on
Toxic Substances Legislation demonstrated what can be accomplished
through interaction of functions when proper leadership is provided.
'Spurred by today's public demands and the proof that joint committee
action can get things done, the Public Relations Committee stepped
tip its practice of meeting with the leadership of certain other
functional committees, particularly Government Relations, Technical
and Legal Advisory.
This was started about 18 months ago to gain a better perspective
of MCA's needs. What we have found is that we can work together
-- that we can have a common purpose and pursuit. We have agreed
upon issues that should be the greatest concern of the association.
These are human health and the environment, and increasing govern­
ment constraints which erode industry's management of its resources.
Cooperation to date has prompted us to adopt a plan for Industry
spokesmanship, encompassing an even larger number of functional
committees.
The plan was proposed by a former chairman of our committee, Ned
Brandt of Dow, and adopted at our September meeting. Most of the
committees we have approached have already responded favorably.
These committees are Air Quality, Water Resources, Solid Waste,
Occupational Health, Government Relations, Legal Advisory and
Chemical Regulations Advisory.
CMA 037124
The plan calls for establishing a task force with representatives
of those committees and the public relations committee to stimulate
spokesmanship on the public issues.
Each committee will be asked to provide basic facts and a statement
representing MCA’s position on their function as related to govern­
ment, health and environment. The Air Quality Committee, for
example, will provide facts on what the chemical industry has done
about air pollution, and provide the industry position on current
legislative and regulatory matters.
Members of the task force would serve as coordinators of the project
recruit the best possible spokesmen from MCA's membership and arrange
platforms in leading cities where maximum exposure to our point of, 6
view can be gained. We have in mind prestigious platforms like the
Economic Club of Detroit, with accompanying appearances on local
radio and TV plus newspaper interviews.
The task force would be responsible for placing industry material
in the hands of selected spokesmen, coordinating appearances on a
geographic basis and making sure that the load was properly spread
among the member companies.
Each speaker would develop his topic in his own way, weaving in
the MCA-developed material at will.
The type of spokesmen we have in mind are you gentlemen, the
directors of MCA, supported by other chief executive officers not
present today.
The plan has both short- and long-range advantages: The short range
is obvious -- to gain some badly needed statements of the chemical
industry point of view in various media. The longer range advantage
will be gained as we build up this corps of spokesmen. MCA has a
constant need for industry experts who can provide statements and
make appearances on relatively short notice.
News media, as you know, will use responses to issues and handle
"the other side's" position when the story is breaking.
There is
no public relations benefit in a tardy response.
It's either
ignored or becomes a liability as its availability provides the
media opportunity to retell the whole sordid story.
We hope to get this plan underway in early 1977.
It goes without saying that all on-going PR programs are being
directed toward the same issues to which the spokesmanship plan
will be addressed.
CMA 037125
I
ChemEcology will expand further its coverage of member company
success stories in the areas of environment and toxic substances.
Participation next April in the American Women in Radio and
Television spokesmanship program for lay audiences will stress
positive contributions by the chemical industry with emphasis on
health and environmental protection.
MCA News will continue to report on industry and company programs
in these key public issues so that good ideas can be shared across
the membership.
We are considering an idea proposed by our member from American
Cyanamid, Joe Calitri, whereby awards could be given to member
company plants which have achieved goals in energy conservation.
This program, of course, could demonstrate MCA's dedication to
energy conservation and show that even without a national energy
policy -- the industry is dedicated to conservation.
We will also continue our three-times-a-year Chemical Issues &
Commentary -- the survey of member companies to identify emerging
issues. This practice goes back to 1973, when we began polling
people participating in MCA activities in six companies and the
professional staff of MCA. That panel has now grown to 19
companies and MCA with over 400 respondents. And it's the study
upon which we base our forward planning we share with you today.
Gentlemen, it's well known that the 95th Congress will inherit
roost of this year's environmental and energy issues. Water and
air pollution legislation will doubtless take over the spotlight
recently occupied by toxic substances.
Chemicals in food and
food packaging will join other lurking problems like pesticides
to keep all of us busy. We must be prepared to answer our critics,
to itemize consequences of tradeoffs and to accentuate the positive
side of the chemical industry.
CMA 037126
AGENDA
MEETING OF THE MCA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
TAB
Opening Remarks and Introduction of Guests
-- Chairman Donley
Approval of September 12, 1978, Minutes
-- Chairman Donley
Financial Report -- Treasurer Herrman
Finance Committee Report -- J. E. Burrell
Proposed Amendment to the Bylaws -- Secretary Barackman
Report of Chairman of the Board -- E. Donley
Association Activities--R. A. Roland
Government Relations Report -- W. M. Stover
3
Report by General Counsel -- E. B, Frost
4
Semiannual Meeting -- B. M. Barackman
New Business
Adjournment.
1
2
Next Meeting of the Board of Directors -- 12:30 p. m. . Tuesday, January 9,
CMA 037602
2058
MINUTES of the two hundred seventieth meeting of the Board of Directors
of the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc. , held at the Pinnacle
Directors:
Secretary:
General Counsel:
Treasurer:
By Invitation:
Edward Donley, Chairman
William R. Barrett, Sr.
H. Barclay Morley
William H. Bricker
Paul F. Oreffice
J. Earl Burrell
George F. Polzer
M. Blouke Carus
Seymour S. Preston, III
Peter J. Fass
Toy F. Reid
William J. Ferracone
Robert A. Roland
John T. Files
Jack B. St. Clair
Charles F. Fogarty
John P. Sachs
John M. Henske
William G. Simeral
William B, Jackson
Charles W. Smith
Richard A. Jay
Eugene J. Sullivan
Emerson Kampen
Raymond C. Tower
William C. Krumrei
Alexander B. Trowbridge
Duncan J. MacLennan
Hugh B. Vanderbilt
James A. McGowan
H. Kent Vanderhoef
Robert L. Mitchell
Harriette F. Witmer
Alfred C. Stepan, Jr.
Bruce M. Barackman
Edmund B. Frost
Gary C. Herrman
Dieter H. Ambros, BASF Wyandotte Corporation
E. M. Beavers, Rohm and Haas Company
& Company
H. W. Buchanan, Virginia Chemicals Inc.
J. S. Coey, Hooker Chemical Corporation
Thomas C. Dabovich, Morton Chemical Company,
A Division of Morton Norwich Products, Inc.
J. Morris Evans, PQ Corporation
Myron T. Foveaux, MCA
James M. Gill, Ethyl Corporation
Stephen L>. Goldstein, Olin Corporation
William W. Huisking, Glyco Chemicals, Inc.
George W. Ingle, MCA
Edward J. Klecka, MCA
Lester Krogh, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing
Company, Chemical Division
Robert H. Malott, FMC Corporation
Harry D. McNeeley, Eastman Kodak Company
CMA 037603
2059
By Invitation:
Max A. Minnig, Borden Chemical Division of
Borden, Inc.
Donald D. Pascal, National Starch and Chemical
Corporation
Victor H. Peterson, MCA
Paul M. Pitts, ARCO/Chemical Company, Division
of Atlantic Richfield Company
L. John Polite, Jr. , Essex Chemical Corporation
P. C. Reilly, Reilly Tar and Chemical Corporation
John E. Slavick, MCA
William M. Stover, MCA
John G. Tritsch, MCA
Konrad M. Weis, Mobay Chemical Corporation
OPENING REMARKS AND INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
With a special welcome to past directors and other guests. Chairman
Donley opened the meeting by calling for self-introduction of those present in
turn.
MINUTES OF SEPTEMBER 12, 1978, MEETING
Minutes of the September 12, 1978, Board meeting, as distributed,
including the financial statement for three months ending August 31, 1978,
were approved.
FINANCIAL REPORT
A summarized financial statement for five months ending October 31,
1978, Exhibit A, was reviewed by Mr. Herrman. Noting that assets totaled
approximately $8. 6 million, of which $4. 4 million related to special proj­
ects, he emphasized that with budget amendments this year, we currently
have budgeted revenues of $4, 525, 000 and total budget expenses of $5, 362, 000.
Assuming no further budget changes, we are looking forward to a budget
deficit of $837,900 at the end of this fiscal year. The monthly Treasurer's
report for the period June 1, 1978 - October 31, 1978 will be mailed with the
Board minutes.
FINANCE COMMITTEE REPORT
As chairman, Mr. Burrell reviewed the activities of the Finance Com­
mittee in addressing the impact on expenses resulting from the reorganization
of MCA. To date, this would create the expected deficit of $837,900 mention­
ed by Mr. Herrman as a result of additional funding approved by the Executive
Committee. This could increase to a deficit of $1,263, 000 if contemplated
additional requests from MCA standing committees were approved. Two
CMA 037604
2060
alternatives for financing the deficit were presented to the Executive Com­
mittee -- funding from reserves or levying a special assessment. In the
former approach, a deficit of $1 million would reduce reserves to 25% of
the operating budget, while reserves would drop to 19% with a deficit of
$1. 3 million as against the general criteria the Association has followed of
a reserve of about 50%. With the special assessment approach, at a
reserve level of 50% a deficit of $1 million would require a special assessment
of 33% of current dues for each member and a deficit of $1.3 million would re­
quire a special assessment of 43%.
The Finance Committee unanimously recommended to the Executive
Committee that the fiscal year 1978-79 deficit should be funded by utilization
of MCA's reserves with the criteria that the operating reserves could not fall
below the 25% level. This was approved by the Executive Committee.
Mr. Donley then reviewed the reorganization of MCA, its enhanced
advocacy role, and the increased commitments of member companies in
providing strong people to the new committees, in order to enable the
Association to respond effectively to the increased pressures of governmental action. He solicited response from the Board and all member com­
panies to the increased communications which will emanate from MCA so
that the Associations activities can best reflect the interests of the industry.
I
PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO THE BYLAWS
Mr. Barackman advised that proposed Bylaws amendments enclosed
with the notice of meeting would effect the necessary changes resulting
from splitting the functions of the Secretary-Treasurer approved by the
Executive Committee.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded,
it was
VOTED: That the proposed amendments
to the Bylaws, as set fourth in Exhibit B,
be approved.
REPORT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD
Mr. Donley's report is attached as Exhibit C.
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES
Mr. Roland's report follows: The Chairman's report is the first of
a series of quarterly reports which will be published to the entire MCA
membership.
CMA 037605
2061
--In the public relations area we had 12 company experts at
the National Association of Farm Broadcasters convention in Kansas
City on hand to discuss 23 topics. 46 broadcasters taped 146 radio
shows to be aired over nearly 1,600 radio stations covering about 75%
of the United States. The program's cost of reaching one person varies
with audience size and ranges from less than one and a half cents to a
thousandth of a cent.
-- In a visit with Alfred Kahn, Chairman of the Council on Wage
and Price Stability (COWPS), he said he was against wage/price controls
and would work for more effective and economical government in the
framework of regulatory reform. Because he indicated a willingness to
do so, a meeting with Mr. Kahn, together with Mr. Barry Bosworth,
director of COWPS, has been requested at which time the chemical in­
dustry problems, as embodied in the economic and regulatory profile
developed for the recent meeting with Commerce Secretary Kreps, would
be discussed - especially in light of the fact that the selection of 1976-77
as base years for profits and prices was unfortunate for many companies.
Meanwhile Mr. Kahn asks for industry support of the announced wage/price
guidelines.
-- Another area of concern is chemical industry coordination with
other associations. To effect this, the new position of Director of
Association Liaison is being established within MCA. This move has been
applauded by some 20 associations with whom it has been discussed. The
Director will be responsible for communicating information regarding
MCA's positions, activities and needs to other relevant industry trade
associations and groups while providing MCA with similar information from
them.
-- The words "Manufacturing Chemists Association" don't accurately
reflect the membership of the industry association for today's man in the
street. The name "Chemical Manufacturers Association" (CMA) conveys
the idea that the association is made up of corporations, rather than persons,
who make the commodity chemicals. The Executive Committee supports
this name change. The matter will be placed on the agenda for the January
Board meeting. The Executive Committee recommends that if approved by
the Board, the entire membership then be polled for their reaction.
-- Mr. Roland concluded his report with a description of the program
planned for the day following the Board meeting.
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS REPORT
Mr. Stover's report, distributed at the meeting,- is attached as Exhibit
D. During his report he reviewed in detail the meeting with Commerce
Secretary Kreps and chemical industry spokesmen and also called attention
to the importance of the question of oil price regulation. Regarding the latter,
CMA 037606
MCA has testified on the pricing issue on numerous occasions, in support
of any actions which permit petroleum prices to rise to world levels
through decontrol or phased removal of price controls. This would en­
able primary energy prices to reflect replacement costs and provide the
maximum incentive to develop new resources and expand the supply base.
At the conclusion of Mr. Stover's report, Mr. Foveaux discussed
the Administration?s anti-inflation program headed by Alfred Kahn, chair­
man of COWPS. He also described the establishment of an MCA task
group charged with monitoring developments in the wage/price area;
guiding companies to sources of information; proposing MCA responses
as appropriate and recommending them for approval at the proper level;
and coordinating communications as they are needed.
REPORT BY GENERAL COUNSEL
Mr. Frost's report is attached as Exhibit E.
BUSINESS ITEM
Report of Membership Committee
As chairman, Mr. Polzer
reported the committee's having examined the qualifications of the company
named below and recommended its election.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded,
it was
VOTED: That Hatco Chemical Corporation
be elected to membership in the Association.
NEW BUSINESS
Mr. Donley advised that the Chairman's quarterly report to the Board
of Directors would be distributed to all member companies.
Mr. Morley expressed concern about proposals developing in the MCA
Occupational Safety and Health Committee for the identification of chronic
hazards on sample labels appearing in MCA safety data sheets. Since safety
data sheet labels could be considered in some quarters as an industry
standard, he felt that there was a serious risk that even minor defects
could lead to costly but unnecessary testing for every product marketed by
a company. He wanted to be sure that proposed chronic hazard labeling
guidelines received appropriate review by all of those member companies
pvith representatives serving on the committees and task groups with respon­
sibilities related to labeling. He was assured by Mr. Roland that the report
of the Occupational Safety and Health Committee, whichhas the responsibility
in this area, will be given the widest possible consideration, including review
by other relevant committees, and that all the input necessary for a good
2063
work product will be considered by that committee and by the staff.
vited comments from anyone having a concern in this matter.
Mr. Henske expressed the view that in two years, if we continue on
our present course, MCA's budget will be about double the current fiscal
year's budget. MCA has become more active, which costa money. If there
are any reservations or questions about where the Association is headed,
they should be communicated between now and spring at which time decisions
concerning next year's budget will be made. We are headed for a material
increase in the costs of running MCA. Comments, advice and guidance of the
member companies are welcomed.
Mr. Donley announced that copies of the Finance Committee report
and minutes will be distributed to all Board members.
Bruce M. Barackman
Secretary
f
Edward Donley
Chairman of the Board
CMA 037608
Exhibit A
REPORT OF THE TREASURER
November 20, 1978
Dollar amounts rounded from tabular details
INCOME & EXPENSE
June 1, 1978 - October 31. 1978
Income
Membership Fees
Other
5 Months (421)
402
Expense
Operations
Projects
Percent of
Budget
127
ASSETS
(As of October 31. 1978)
Cash
Investments
Miscellaneous
41
8,638
8
CMA 037609
Exhibit B
Proposed Amendments
to
MCA Bylaws
Attached are MCA Bylaws amendments submitted by
General Counsel to effect changes resulting from splitting
the functions of the Secretary-Treasurer.
MCA
CMA 037610
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE BYLAWS
(Language to be deleted struck through;
new language underscored)
Article III -Section 4.
MEMBERSHIP
Election of Applicants
(Fourth sentence)
Following election to membership, notice thereof
shall be mailed to the applicant and to all other members of the
Association by the Secreta-py-Treasurer Secretary and upon pay­
ment of the entrance fee and membership fee the applicant shall
become a member of the Association.
Article III -Section 5.
MEMBERSHIP
Withdrawal
Any member may, upon payment of any unpaid
obligations to the Association, withdraw from membership at any
time by giving at least thirty days' advance written notice thereof
to the President or the SeeFefca-py-TreasuFeFr Secretary.
Article III-Section 7,
MEMBERSHIP
Termination (Second sentence)
It shall be the duty of each such member to give
prompt notice in writing to the President or Seerefcapy—'Treasurer
Secretary of any change in ownership or activities affecting the
qualifications for membership of such member.
Article IV -Section 3.
FEES
Arrears
Any member failing to pay his entrance or annual
membership fee within thirty days from the time it becomes due,
shall be notified by the Seerefrapy-TFeasufsf Treasurer and if
payment thereof is not made within the succeeding thirty days,
such member shall be reported to the Board of Directors as in
arrears, and, if so ordered by the Board, shall be dropped from
membership and thereupon shall forfeit all rights ant^ privileges
of membership.
Article V -Section 9.
2
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Minutes
The Board of Directors and the Executive Committee,
respectively, shall keep minutes of its proceedings and after each
meeting shall transmit to the Seereta-p-y—Treasurer Secretary of the
Association, for permanent filing among the records of the Asso­
ciation, a copy of the minutes of such meeting signed by the Secre­
tary of the meeting and certified as correct by the presiding officer.
Article VI -Section 1.
OFFICERS
Number and Election (First and second sentences)
The Officers of the Association shall consist of a
Chairman of the Board, a Vice Chairman of the Board, a Chair­
man of the Executive Committee, a President, one or more Vice
Treasurer. Except for the Vice Presidents^ and-the-Seerefca-pyT-rea-s-ure-fT the Secretary and the Treasurer, the Officers shall
be elected annually by the Board of Directors at the Annual Meet­
ing of the Board.
Article VI -Section 5.
OFFICERS
The President
(First sentence only)
There shall be elected as President an executive who
will devote his full time to administering the affairs of the Association.
Article VI -Section 6.
OFFICERS
The Vice Presidents
(First sentence)
The President, with the approval of the Board of
Directors, shall appoint one or more Vice Presidents, each of whom
shall have such powers and duties as shall be prescribed by the Presi­
dent; he may also designate the gec-reiary-T-reaew-e*’- Secretary and
the Treasurer to be * Vice Presidents.
Article VI -Section 7.
OFFICERS
The-Seerefca-py—'Treasurer
The Secretary and the Treasurer
The Seorefca-ry—Treasurer Secretary and the Treasurer
shall be appointed by the President, with the approval of the Board of
Directors. H-e- The Treasurer shall be the chief administrative,- fi­
nancial and accounting officer of the Association and shall have charge
CMA 037612
- 3 of all funds of the Association and shall cause such funds to be deposited
to the credit of the Association in one or more banks, designated by the
Board of Directors
Such funds may be drawn only over the signature
of such person or persons as may be authorized by the Board of Directors
The Treasurer shall maintain a proper record of all dues, fees,
quired, at the expense of the Association, to give a bond for the faith­
ful discharge of his duty in such amount and with such conditions as
the Board of Directors may require.
The Seereta-py-Treasurer Secretary shall have the
custody of the books and papers and the corporate seal of the Asso­
ciation; and shall keep a correct roster of all members with their
last known addresses_ and-frhall-mainfc^m-a-p’POpe-F-•r«-c«wd-e£all
duesr -fees-, -and-c-ont-ribution-s- reeeivecf.The Seereta-py-TFeasurer Secretary shall give
notice of and attend all meetings of the Association and of the
Board of Directors, and snail keep minutes of such meetings.
He shall notify tne Officers and Directors and members of the
Association of their election, and committee members of their
appointment.
I
I
In case of the absence or disability of the Seerefra-nyT-reaswe-r- Secretary or the Treasurer, the President may appoint
an acting SeeFeta-r-y-Treasurer? Secretary or Treasurer.
Article VI -Section 9.
OFFICERS
Compensation of Officers
iSecond sentence)
The President, the Vice Presidents, the- SeoretagyT-rea-s-u-re-r-, the Secretary, the Treasurer, any officers and agents
elected or appointed under Section 8 of this Article, and all other
employees of the Association shall receive such compensation as
may be determined by the Board of Directors.
Article VII -- MEETINGS
Section 1.
Annual Meeting
The Annual Meeting of members of the Association
for the election of Directors and other purposes, shall be held dur­
ing the month of June each year, at such time and place, either
within or without the State of New York, as may be fixed by the
Board of Directors. At least fourteen days' written notice of the
Annual Meeting shall be given by the See Fefea-i*y~Treasurer Sec re tary to each member of the Association
CMA 037613
Exhibit C
CHAIRMAN'S REPORT
August, September, October 1978
Introduction
The close of the 95th congress in October brought a mass of
legislation which we are still studying for its relevance to
the chemical industry.
The National Energy Program, of course,
is the most important of these last-minute bills because of
the wide-ranging and continuing impact it will have.
But
amid the closing rush were other signal successes for MCA
and the industry.
They were treated extensively in a special
Federal Legislative Bulletin and a special insert to MCA
News, but their names bear repeating here:
Section 311,
"superfund," TSCA amendments, energy reporting.
The successes were the result of close cooperation among
all staff members.
It is this kind of cooperation, this
kind of activity that will mark the spirit of the new ad­
vocacy role MCA has begun to play.
The agenda for the next quarter is full.
The Resource con­
servation and Recovery Act, certain aspects of the Toxic
Substances Control Act, pretreatment regulations, preven­
tion of significant deterioration regulations, state implem­
entation plans on air pollution, product liability legislation.
And more.
Never, it seems, has there been so much to do, and
never has the Association been in better condition to do it.
The reorganization is working, and the more tightly structured
committees and staff are responding with renewed spirit to the
tasks facing them.
EDWARD DONLEY
Chairman of the Board
CMA 037614
TECHNICAL DEPARTMENT
CHEMICAL REGULATIONS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
MCA has made every effort
to make clear to EPA that overly strict rules under section 5
(Premanufacturing and processing Notices) can obstruct innovation
if demands for health, safety and marketing information go beyond
the statutory need to establish that there is no unreasonable risk.
Economic Impacts Task Group.
A one-year, $300,000 pilot study on
the economic impact of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
was begun with the signing of an agreement with National Economic
Research Associates, Inc.
The primary objectives are to establish
a method for measuring the economic impact of TSCA on the chemical
industry and the U.S. economy, to impact EPA during the regulatory
development process and to impact Congress for regulatory reform.
Over the next few months, the actual survey questionnaire will be
developed and pretested on a small group of member companies.
DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE.
MCA is asking appropriate member companies
if they accept the railroad's proposal for a new tank car mileage
allowance system that would increase compensation by almost twothirds in three years. Approval by MCA member companies and
other parties to the proceeding seems certain.
MCA will file a
statement noting that a proposal to change truck drivers' hours of
service might actually increase accidents.
The proposal of the
Transportation Department's Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety will
increase costs by 25 percent.
In an Interstate commerce Commission
proceeding on increased freight rates and charges, MCA has filed
a statement contending that the rail rates on six chemical product
groups were already too high.
MCA plans to file a similar state­
ment on future railroad freight rate increase proposals that would
raise chemical freight rates.
ENERGY CONSERVATION COMMITTEE.
The latest energy conservation
report (for the period June 1977 to June 1978) to the Department
of Energy was presented to the press at a luncheon on November
6, with Robert A. Roland as host.
Also distributed to the press
were MCA replies to the General Accounting Offices' reporting
program and the Energy Information Administration's report to
Congress that could give Congress the impression that a more
legislation and regulation are needed to accomplish what already
is being accomplished.
The committee is working on tentative
industry positions on the National Energy Act and has discussed
coal conversion regulations with the DOE's economic regulatory
CMA 037615
-2administrator.
On December 7, the committee will conduct a seminar
for DOE on cost determination in the chemical industry.
ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
The Engineering Advisory Committee
(EAC) National Electrical Code Task Group met in August to
recommend MCA proposals for revision of the National Electrical
Code.
The EAC's Task Group on Electrical Motors met in August
to finish a proposed MCA guide entitled "Recommended Specifi­
cation Guide for NEMA-Frame Size Totally-Enclosed Fan-Cooled
Horizontal Induction Motors for chemical Industry Service".
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE.
During August through October,
the Environmental Management Committee and its task groups met
more than 30 times on its present major programs:
solid waste
regulations, hazardous chemical spills, pretreatment regulations,
prevention of significant deterioration regulations, content of
pending revisions to state implementation plans, health effects
of air quality, water quality criteria, toxic pollutant sampling
and new economic perspectives on environmental regulations.
The committee also developed a program for combined technical and
legal actions to prepare the bases for responding to 25 critical
regulations, among 87 identified of importance, scheduled to be
issued by the end of 1979.
In structuring this program, the EMC
established 15 task groups, compared to 47 under the "old" committee
structure, and reduced task group members to about 80 from more
than 250.
INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
On September 28, Robert L. Mitchell of
Celanese Corporation presented a statement before the Sub­
committee on Miscellaneous Revenue Measures of the House Ways
and Means Committee supporting the tax deductibility of reserves
to pay product liability claims.
Congress failed to act on
legislation for reserve deductibility but instead enacted tax
"carry-back" provisions which will do little to alleviate pro­
duct liability claim problems,
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEE.
In a statement for
MCA before the Subcommittee on Labor of the Senate Committee on
Human Resources on October 5, Dr. Bruce W. Karrh, medical director
of the DuPont Company, called on OSHA to work cooperatively with
industry rather than taking punitive action to secure an injuryfree workplace.
CMA037616
In a post-hearing brief submitted to OSHA, MCA said the agency
exceeded its statutory authority in issuing its much debated
carcinogen regulation proposal.
Also reviewed were the need for
risk/benefit analysis and points in support of the American
industrial Health Council position.
A Task Group on Chronic Hazard Labeling is drafting recommended
guidelines for use in preparing exemplary labels in MCA chemical
safety data sheets.
At its meeting September 13, the occupational Safety and Health
Committee recommended that MCA challenge the "access to records"
portion of the final (interim) regulation promulgated by OSHA
regarding exposure and medical records.
Guidelines are being
developed by a task group on this subject for the collection of
health and industrial hygiene information to be used in epidemi­
ologic studies.
The use of such guidelines by member companies
would help assure compatibility of the data when such studies are
undertaken.
Guidelines also are being developed on the "evaluation, classifi­
cation, risk assessment and control of chemical teratogens," as
well as "control of embryotoxic agents in the workplace," by still
another task group of the committee.
SPECIAL PROJECTS.
Fluorocarbons.
Significant progress has been
made in the fluorocarbon research program administered by MCA
towards its goal of determining the effects of these materials
upon the atmosphere.
Sufficient data and knowledge of the
chemistry involved from studies completed to date have made it
possible to begin development of a multidimensional computer
model of the role of fluorocarbons in the atmosphere.
At its September 28 meeting, the Technical Panel on Fluorocarbon
Research approved proposals for the continued operation of the
Atmospheric Lifetimes Experiment.
This project is designed to
determine the residence time of fluorocarbons in the troposphere,
and, in combination with the computer modeling activity, will
yield valuable information about the lifetimes of fluorocarbons
in the atmosphere.
Four stations analyze ambient air continu­
ously for species of interest.
The fluorocarbon research program
provided $420,000 to establish these stations and to begin
operations in early 1978.
The program provided an additional
CMA 037617
$335,000 on September 28 to operate the stations and to analyze
data for the second year of the experiment.
Other ongoing studies of particular importance are the development of a method of analysis for total chlorine in the stratosphere and catalytic destruction of fluorocarbons in the
troposphere by air-borne dust and sand particles.
Proposals
for trend analysis of ozone concentration, joining the rela­
tively new satellite observations with an extensive set of
ground-based data, are presently under consideration in the
panel.
Phosgene.
The Technical Panel on Phosgene Safety met on Octo­
ber 31 to complete action on 14 agenda items. Among the more
important of these were six investigative proposals.
Five of
these are concerned with retrospective mortality studies, retrospective pulmonary studies and a prospective on-site study in a
member company wherein the phosgene unit is relatively isolated
from other suspect exposures.
The sixth project under considera­
tion is a long-term, low-level inhalation study.
j
j
J
I
Titanium Dioxide.
The Tabershaw Occupational Medicine Associates
P.A., have in progress a feasibility analysis for an epidemiolog­
ical study of titanium dioxide workers.
On-site visits have
recently been completed.
A draft of the final report is to be
submitted in November.
Depending on the findings evolving from
the feasibility study, a full-scale epidemiological investigation
might be conducted.
Trichloroethylene.
The Trichloroethylene Task Group on the Audit
of the Chronic Inhalation Study met in November to prepare a final
report on this research program, which was conducted by industrial
BIO-TEST Laboratories, Decatur, 111.
Two important actions must
be completed by the audit task group prior to its final report:
A comprehensive review of and critique on the air concentration
report or the exposure chamber concentration report.
Review of
a critique on a draft of the final report covering a histopath­
ologic study conducted by Experimental pathology Laboratories,
Inc.
CMA 037618
Eoichlorohydrin.
The Technical panel on Epichlorohydrin will meet
on November 21 to review the findings of the 90-day inhalation
probe.
Also attending will be Dr. A. R. Sellakumar, who will
discuss his research at the New York University Medical center.
On October 12 a Current Intelligence Bulletin was issued advising
that epichlorohydrin should be treated in the workplace as if
it were a human carcinogen.
Ethylene Dichloride.
Research on the effects of long-term inhala­
tion is not yet complete, although preliminary results do not show
any excess carcinogenicity.
The National Cancer Institute
recently issued its report on the carcinogenesis bioassay of
ethylene dichloride, stating that oral administration of the com­
pound produced cancers in rats and mice.
Vinylidene Chloride.
On September 21, a joint NIOSH/OSHA Current
Int lligence Bulletin was issued on the carcinogenicity of vinyl
halides — including vinylidene chloride.
Citing the NIOSH
Criteria Document and Dr. C. Maltoni's work, the bulletin says
vinylidene chloride caused angiosarcoma of the liver in
animals.
The bulletin is currently being reviewed by the technical
panel, especially in light of the extensive research program MCA
has administered.
Benzene,
in mid-summer 1978, MCA entered into a contract with
Tabershaw Occupational Medicine Associates for a mortality study
of workers exposed to benzene at nine operating plants of member
companies.
This epidemiological work is expected to be completed
about the Spring of 1980.
Butylated Hydroxytoluene (BHT). Additional funds have been approved
for an expert's review of the Franklin institute's report on a
literature survey.
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS,
procedures to establish and maintain
other technical publications in addition to Chemical Safety Data
Sheets
in an up-to-date condition were recommended by outside
counsel in September.
Steps to implement the recommendations
are being taken.
The MCA film, "Safety in the Chemical Laboratory"
was found to be out-of-date, has been withdrawn from distribution
and purchasers of the film advised.
Drafts of 11 revised chemical
Safety Data Sheets are being prepared; eight drafts are now in the
edit/review stage; two drafts are in final form, awaiting resolu­
CMA 037619
tion of chronic hazard question before publication, and one drafton phosgene—has been published.
Revised drafts of eight Safety Guides are in various states of
completion, four are in final draft and one has been published.
CHEMTREC.
One CHEMTREC workshop was held in Cleveland in October.
One is scheduled for Atlanta in November.
The manager of CHEMTREC
made the following presentations: Detroit — 1978 Mid-continent
Conference & Exhibition on Control of Chemical & oil Spills;
Cincinnati — International Association of Fire Chiefs; Maryland University of Maryland - Fire & Rescue Services; Delaware —
Chemical Industry Council and New Castle County Fire Chiefs
Association.
CHEMTREC Statistics:
Total inbound Calls
Emergency calls
Total Emergencies
Transportation
Non-transportation
3,087
877
739
665
74
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS DEPARTMENT
LEGISLATIVE COMMUNICATIONS:
Energy.
in connection with the
National Energy Plan legislation proposed by the administration,
MCA worked in close concert with Washington representatives of
member companies and members of the Energy Conservation Committee.
Congressional developments were monitored closely to insure that
enacted bills were compatible with industry interests,
particular
attention was given to energy tax proposals which might have
produced user taxes or a crude oil equalization tax.
Environment.
Superfund.
MCA took the leading role in an int rindustry effort to block enactment of this highly objectionable
piece of legislation. We were joined by petroleum, waterways,
trucking, railroad and other interests.
CMA 037620
Section 311.
MCA was the principal industry organization responsible
for enactment of a vastly improved Section 311 of the Clean Water
Act.
The section now clearly distinguishes between discharges
associated with routine operations and spills from non-routine
causes.
The Association, working closely with EPA and several
other industry groups and Congressional staff, was able to help
to steer the industry bill through both senate and House in the
final hours of the 95th Congress.
The Government Relations Department has begun evaluation of
1 gislative prospects for the coming year in the environmental
area, with particular attention to the likelihood of amendments
to RCRA.
OSHA.
MCA testified before the Senate Labor Subcommittee during
its oversight hearings on OSHA in early October.
Our staff
participated in polishing of Association testimony, gathered
useful background material on Subcommittee members, helped to
srief and prepare the witness team and handled all logistical
rommunications before and after the hearings.
i
MCA monitored and reported in detail on the OSHA oversight hear­
ings conducted by the House Manpower Subcommittee in mid-September.
AIHC.
In support of AIHC programs, the staff participated in a
number of meetings with Washington representatives and with
communications specialists handling the AIHC media campaign.
A
number of advisory communications have been sent to all member
companies keeping them abreast of developments.
Special attention
is being given to constructive contacts with members of Congress
to explain the AIHC alternatives package.
Taxation.
In connection with MCA testimony in late August on the
tax reduction bill, the staff worked closely with the Association
witness in preparing him for his appearance before the Senate
Finance Committee.
We coordinated development and submission of
an Association statement on the "sunset" review of taxation issues
which was filed September 1. A letter to the House Ways and Means
Committee was prepared in early September which expresses our views
on the tax treatment of employee fringe benefits.
On the 31st of
October there was a general meeting of the MCA Tax Policy Committee.
CMA 037621
Toxic Substances Control Act.
The staff lead industry efforts to
communicate with Congress regarding the impending amendments to
TSCA, a version of which passed the Senate containing an objectionable indemnification provision.
The measure died in the House of
Representatives.
1
Transportation.
MCA continues to monitor closely the increased
Congressional interest and attention to emergency response capa­
bilities in connection with transportation accidents.
We worked
closely with Congressional staff and participated in the MCA
Emergency Response Workshop conducted in Cleveland in October.
We monitored Congressional attention to the Norfolk and Western
rail strike, which was causing concern for many chemical shippers.
1
Trade/Tariffs.
The staff answered numerous requests from member
companies and media regarding the multilateral trade negotiations.
A staff member represented MCA as a consultant to the U. S.
Government's delegation to the annual meeting of the Economic
Commission of Europe, Chemical industry committee.
In connection
with the visit by leaders from the European Council of Chemical
Industry Federations, we prepared an economic analysis and fore­
cast paper for their advance review.
In addition, the staff
chaired the staff-level briefing conducted for the delegation
during their visit October 10.
The staff participated in numerous
meetings with government officials on trade matters including
representatives of GAO, the Office of the Special Representative
for Trade Negotiations, the Department of Commerce and Congressional
staff.
Product Liability.
The MCA staff helped prepare a letter to a
Senate Finance Subcommittee setting forth the Association's views
on legislation to provide tax deductions for amounts held in
reserve for product liability losses.
The letter was submitted
in early September.
Later that month we were also involved in
preparing testimony in the same area which was presented to the
House Ways and Means Subcommittee,
J
CMA 037622
PROJECTS AND SERVICES:
Chemical Forum.
The Chemical Forum lunch­
eon series is planned and managed by the staff of the Government
Relations Department.
The September 12 luncheon featured an ad­
dress by Representative James G. Martin (R-NC), a member of the
House ways and Means Committee and a well-known spokesman for
reasonableness on questions of science and government regulation.
On October 10 the forum was addressed by Under Secretary of
Commerce Sidney Harman.
Briefing Breakfasts.
The Briefing Breakfast series is conduc­
ted by the MCA staff as a means of providing regular up-dates
for Washington representatives of member companies.
Status
reports and current action in both legislative and regulatory
areas are presented.
Special guests frequently make brief
presentations and answer questions.
On August 31 the special
guest was Charles Bruce, a counsel on the staff of the Senate
Finance Committee, who discussed pending tax legislation.
On
October 26, William F. Hildenbrand, secretary to the minority
of the Senate and principal Senate floor aide to Senate Minority Leader Howard Baker, gave his forecast on the Senate races
in the November 7 elections.
I
Monitoring and Publications,
in addition to routine legislative
monitoring, the staff published editions of the Federal Legisla­
tive Bulletin on August 29 and October 19 that gave up-to-date
reports on legislation of interest to the chemical industry.
The October issue furnished a wrap-up of the 95th Congress.
Legislative status charts were also prepared on several oc­
casions for use at Briefing Breakfasts and for distribution to
the MCA Board of Directors and MCA Executive Committee.
INTERNAL MISCELLANEOUS:
During this quarter the Department added
two new staff members.
H. Christopher Nolde joined us as legis­
lative representative for safety and health.
He will manage the
legislative communications programs which relate to TSCA and OSHA
and will serve as legislative editor.
Miss Doris Baquine joins
the staff as secretary to Mr. Nolde.
1
i
CMA 037623
GENERAL COUNSEL
The first few months of activities under the MCA reorganiza­
tion have brought a significant increase in the scope of MCA's
legal advisory program.
The successful litigation in the
Western District of Louisiana against EPA's regulations under
Section 311 of the Clean Water Act was the first major case
brought by MCA.
More recently MCA joined the American Petro­
leum Institute and the American Iron and Steel Institute in
successfully challenging OSHA's benzene regulations in the
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals.
MCA also has asked for a
review of EPA's Pretreatment Regulations adopted under Sec­
tion 307 of the Clean Water Act and a review of EPA's Pre­
vention of Significant Deterioration regulations under the
Clean Air Act.
MCA's legal advocacy presently covers a broad range of ad­
ministrative and regulatory activity including OSHA's proposed
generic cancer regulation, OSHA’s proposed medical records
retention regulations. Consumer Product Safety Commission's
cancer regulation, EPA's TSCA regulations, EPA's Clean Water
Act permit regulations, and EPA's Resource and Recovery Act
regulations.
This broad scope of advocacy is not jis t legal
argument.
Rather, it integrates legal and technical advocacy,
with MCA counsel working closely with MCA committees and tech­
nical staff.
Not all of the advocacy is litigation.
In the
case of Section 311 regulations, successful litigation paved
the way for a more permanent settlement negotiated with EPA
and implemented by legislative amendment.
The Section 311
negotiation has, in turn, provided the opportunity for what
may be very meaningful, high-level negotiations concerning
RCRA and liabilities related to solid waste disposal.
PUBLIC RELATIONS AND EDUCATION
ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION.
In addition to continuing to pro­
vide news on environmental and occupational health matters.
CMA 037624
ChemEcology addressed three major issues of importance to the
industry during this quarter.
Transportation safety was the theme in the August issue.
in
September, ChemEcology was careful to provide facts about the
Lov canal incident which most of the media chose to ignore.
This helped to put that issue much more in its proper perspec­
tive.
Several articles in the October issue emphasized the
growing realization that risk/benefit is more than a concept—
it is a fact of life.
For example, the National Research Coun­
cil says that the benefits of nitrogen fertilizers outweigh
their possible risk to the ozone layer, and a federal court
struck down a workplace standard for benzene on the basis that
its cost exceeded potential benefits to employees.
During this period 400 additional thought and opinion leaders
voluntarily asked to be added to our mailing list, bringing
total ChemEcology circulation to 24,000.
Three Toxic Substances Management Memos were issued on Sec­
tions 5 and 8(d) of the Toxic Substances control Act, and on
the Association's economic impact study of the Act.
At the
same time, the circulation of the memos has been expanded
and opened to anyone in the industry with a "need to know."
Environmental information was made available during these
three months through MCA exhibits at meetings of the American
Chemical Society, the American public Health Association
and the National Science Teachers Association.
Education Activities.
An ititial printing of 50,000 copies
of "Minority Engineers—A Guide to Career Selection" has been
exhausted.
The booklet is MCA's contribution to the industry's
effort to achieve a parity in the hiring of minority engineers
within 10 years.
A completely new edition of "Chemistry Proj­
ects and Science Fairs" was also published.
Distribution of
"Experiments in the chemistry of Foods" was stopped because
it included suspect chemicals.
A public advisory has been
issued. ■ MCA exhibited for the first time at a meeting of the
CMA 037625
American Public Health Association, a group that includes
environmentalists, public health directors, government ad­
ministrators and educators.
October was also MCA's first
time to exhibit at an American chemical Society meeting.
At the National Science Teachers Association convention
in October, MCA strengthened its liaison and continued
its role of leadership within NSTA by serving on the conven­
tion planning committee.
Through MCA’s efforts, the
chief toxicologist of The Dow Chemical Company probably
will address the NSTA national meeting next April.
The
manager of education participated in several ACS con­
ferences and in a conference on high school chemical edu­
cation.
AGENDA
MEETING OF THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Yellowstone Room, Hyatt Regency on Capitol Hill
Washington, D. c.
TAB
Call to Order — Chairman Oreffice
Approval of Minutes of Meeting, September 28-29, 1981
Treasurer's Report — G. C. Herrman
Association Activities:
1
Developments Affecting Domestic International
Sales Corporations — Glenn W. white. The Dow
Chemical Company
2
Survey of CMA Companies: Effect of Reagan Tax
3
Report of Special Programs Advisory Committee —
4
Sunset of Public Risk Analysis Special Committee
and Establishment of Regulatory Impact Special
Committee — Konrad M. Weis; Jackson B. Browning,
Union Carbide Corporation
5
Status Report on Member Services — V. H. Peterson
6
10:05-10:15
Report of Technical Director — G. V. Cox
7
10:15-10:25
Report of General Counsel — B. B. Frost
8
10:25-10:35
Report of Director of Government Relations —
9
10:35-10:45
New Business
10:45
Adjournment
Next Meeting of the Board of Directors:
The Arizona 8iltmore,Phoenix, Arizona
Monday and Tuesday, January 11-12, 1982,
CMA 037737
2.171
MINUTES of the two-hundred eighty-fifth meeting of the Board of Directors of
the Chemical Manufacturers-Association, Inc., held at the Hyatt Regency on
Directors
Paul F. Oreffice, Chairman
Louis Fernandez, Vice Chairman
Richard C. Ashley
William B. Jackson
Dexter F. Baker
Raymond H. Marks
Robert P. Barnett
Dwight C. Minton
^Charles E. Brookes
Harry w. Buchanan
William C. Roher
Carlyle G. Caldwell
Robert A. Roland
Lester E. Coleman
John P. Sachs
Orell T. Collins
Robert s. Dudley
william J. simeral
Richard E. Engebrecht
Orin R. Smith
Robert W. Garwig
Allan J. Tomlinson
Arthur L. Goeschell
Hugh B. Vanderbilt
James B. Henderson
Edward A. Von Doersten
Paul F. Hoffman
Konrad M. Weis
Edwin C. Holmer
William G. West
Richard J. Hughes
Louis G. Zachary
Ray R. Irani
Secretary:
General Counsel:
Treasurer:
Bruce M. Barackman
Edmund B. Frost
Gary C. Herrman
By Invitation:
Jackson B. Browning, Union Carbide Corporation
D. Christopher Cathcart, CMA
Geraldine V. Cox, CMA
Myron T. Foveaux, CMA
Robert B. Hill, CMA
William C. Krumrei, The Procter & Gamble Company
victor H. Peterson, CMA
Ernest S. Robson, SOCMA, Monsanto Company
James N. Sites, CMA
William M. Stover, CMA
Glenn W. White, The Dow Chemical Company
The meeting was called to order by Chairman Oreffice.
APPROVAL OF SEPTEMBER 28-29, 1981 MINUTES
Minutes of the September 28-29, 1981 meeting, as distributed, were approved.
TREASURER'S REPORT
Mr. Herman's report is attached as Exhibit A. Additionally he advised that
the latest financial statements concerning the four months ending September 30, 1981,
CMA 037738
2172
indicate overall no significant variances from budget. Member dues, however,
will be somewhat lower than originally budgeted but this will be more than
recovered by investment earnings which are higher than originally anticipated.
He encouraged attendance at the November 10 and November 17 meetings of
the Board Review Committees which will provide significant input to th budget
process. The budget will be initially reviewed by the Finance Committee on
March 8, 1972.
REPORT OF ACTIONS TAKEN AT EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEETING
Mr. Simeral described the recent visit to Brussels where he and Mr. Oreffice
continued the dialogue on problems of common interest with the policy group of
CEFIC. He then advised that Mr. Henderson had reported on a meeting of the Com­
munications Policy Review Committee. A full discussion of the communications
program will take place at the January Board meeting.
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES
Developments Affecting Domestic International Sales Corporation (DISC)
Following a status report on DISC developments (Exhibit B). Mr. White
presented the report of the Tax Policy Committee on DISC (Exhibit C).
Mr. Roland, referring to the discussion at the last Board meeting con­
cerning the establishment of the Investment Policy Advisory Committee
to the Office of Trade Representative, announced that Mr. Dexter Baker
has been nominated as the chemical industry representative to that com­
mittee. The CMA International Trade Committee will establish a task
group to provide support in this area.
Survey of CMA Member Companies;
Effect of Reagan Tax Cuts on- R&D
Mr. stover presented the attached report. Exhibit D.
Sunset of Public Risk Analysis Special Committee and Establishment of
Regulatory Impact Special Committee
Dr. Weis presented the proposal, previously approved by the Executive
Committee, which would terminate the Public Risk Analysis Special Com­
mittee and establish the Regulatory Impact Special Committee with the
charter and membership as set forth in Exhibit R. Following remarks
by Mr. Browning:
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded,
it was
VOTED:
To approve Exhibit E.
Status Report on Member Services
Mr. Peterson updated his report, Exhibit F. In additional he described
the first annual meeting of state groups scheduled for November 4 in
Washington, O.C.
CMA 037739
2173
Sapoc^ of Special Programs Advisory Ccmai»»aa 'spao
Or. Cox invited attention to the 3PAC report, Exhibit G. noting that
the Executive Committee nad approved its ^authorization for another
year.
REPORT OF TECHNICAL DIRECTOR
3r. Cox's report is attached as Exhibit H.
Again she urged ail nonparticipants to seriously consider participating m the hard-copy phase of the
CHEMTREC communications program.
PWILEKD MATERIAL REDACTED
REPORT Of DIRECTOR Of GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
In expanding on his report, Exhibit J, Mr. Stover described the political
situation in the Congress in order to contribute to a better understanding of
the current attache on EPA and it* Administrator. Support, as appropriate, of
SPA and Anne Corsuch, as well aa other Agency heeds, was urged.
He also discussed the prospects for congressional action on the Clean Air
Act and advised that CMA continue* to participate in the business coalition which
is working for amendments this year. During discussion the view was expressed
chat education of the public and the Congress muse continue in regard to amending
the Clean Air Act so that the advocates aren't perceived as trying to gut tha Act.
NEW BOSINESS
Mr. Oreffice announced the resignation, effective October 8, 1981, of
william <3. Kay, Jr., Director of tha Association. To fill the vacancy thus
creacsd on the Board, Mr. Oreffiee on behalf of the Nominating Cosnittee,
nominated Mr. Wilbert J. Hagers, Croup Vice President, Sun Company, Inc. and
President of Sun Refining and Marketing Company, aa Director of the Association.
ON MOTION
it was
duly mads an* seconded
VOTED> To elected Wilbert J. Magers
a Director of the Association for the
remainder of tha fiscal year, effactive
November 3, 1981.
Bruce M. Barackmen
Vice President-Secretary
Paul f. ofeffic
Chairman of the Board
CMA 037740
EXHIBIT A
TREASURERS REPORT
Five Months Ending October 31, 1981
This report will be prepared and distributed following
the end of the month.
For your reference, the following is provided:
The approved budget and funding for the fiscal year
beginning June 1, 1981 and ending May 31, 1982.
e
The approved budget for the separately funded
8iomedica1 and Environmental Special Program area.
A summary recap of the approved budget and funding
for all Communication and Public Relations
expenditures through CMA.
CMA 037741
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
APPROVED BUDGET AND FUNOING FOR THE
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1981 and ending May 31, 1982
REVENUE:
Membership Dues
Investment Revenue
Meetings (Net of Expenses)
GENERAL OPERATIONS REVENUE
1981-82
Annual Budget
S 9,500,000
800,000
232,000
$10,532,000
ChemCAP Assessment 9 40% of Dues
3,800,000
Utilization of ChemCAP Assessment
collected during prior year
TOTAL REVENUE
160,000
$14,492,000
PROGRAM AND MANAGEMENT EXPENSES:
General Counsel
Government Relations
International Trade 4 Economics
State Activities Program
Conmunications and Public Relations
Technical Administration
Health, Safety 4 Chemical Regulations
Environmental Activities
Distribution, Energy, Engineering
Chemtrec
Outside Legal Fees
Outside Technical Consulting
Executive Department
Accounting, Purchasing 4 Building Services
Printing, Distribution 4 Computer Services
GENERAL OPERATIONS EXPENSES
ChemCAP Expenses
TOTAL EXPENSES
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
Note:
760,600
722.400
222.300
204.400
1,131,400
181,200
734.300
662.500
417,600
621.500
1,600,000
1,166,800
1,222,100
469,200
415,700
$10,532,000
3,960,000
$14,492,000
147
The above budget and funding does not Include the activities
and staff of the separately funded Biomedical and Environmental
Special Programs area.
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
APPROyEO BUOGET ANO FUNOING FOR
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1981 and ending May 31, 1982
REVENUE:
1981-82
Annual Budget
Overhead reimbursement
9 S500 per day
Investment Revenue (3 9%
324,000
Less: Direct Credit of
Investment Revenue to
the Fluorocarbon Program
Publication Sales
1,000
TOTAL REVENUE
Budget
Amendment*
1981-82
Annual Budget
As Amended
S
39,200
680,500
324,000
1,000
S
804,300
39,200
843,500
Salaries 4 Related Expenses $
Employee Benefits
Travel 4 Staff Training
Dues, Subscriptions 4 Pubs.
Meetings 4 Workshops
Outside Printing, Artwork
- 4 Graphics
Direct Postage, Freight 4
Delivery
Direct Supplies 4 General
Office Expense
Taxes 4 Insurance
Special Insurance
Rent 4 Occupancy
Common Cost Expenses
Administrative Support:
Technical Administration
Office of General Counsel
Accounting
Printing 4 Distribution
349,200
65,600
8,400
1,200
800
S
29,400
5,500
800
200
100
378,600
71,100
9,200
1,400
900
TOTAL EXPENSES
804,300
EXPENSES:
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
500
500
11,000
500
11,500
25,800
27,300
56,000
44,300
66,700
500
2,200
26,300
29,500
56,000
44,300
66,700
48,700
74,100
13,700
11,000
48,700
74,100
13,700
11,000
12
S
39,200
2
S
843,500
14
The addition of a program administrator and secretary to the Special
Programs staff was approved at the September Executive Committee
meeting.
CMA 037743
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
SUMMARY RECAP OF COMMUNICATIONS ANO
PUBLIC RELATIONS EXPENDITURES
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1981 and ending May 31, 1982
The following detail summarizes total funding and expenditures through CMA In the Com
munications and Public Relations area as an integrated program. The portions funded
by members dues and those funded by the special ChemCAP assessment are presented both
separately and as a combined total.
PROGRAM FUNDING:
Oues & Other General Revenue Required
to support program
ChemCAP Assessment 0 40% of Dues
Utilization of ChemCAP assessment
collected during prior year
1981-82
Approved
Comnunications
PROGRAM EXPENSES:
PROGRAM EXPENSES EXCLUDING ALL ADVERTISING
Advertising development, space costs, etc.
TOTAL PROGRAM EXPENSES
1981-82
Combined
Communications
Budget
3,800,000
3,800,000
160,000
160,000
S
TOTAL FUNOING
Salaries 4 Related Expense
Employee Benefits
Travel 4 Staff Training
Dues, Subscriptions & Publications
Meetings & Workshops
Research & Opinion Polls
Media 4 Public Relations
Outside Printing, Artwork 4 Graphics
Audio Visual Material 4 Distribution
Outside Publication Distribution
News Materials/Work shops
Community Committees
Speakers Program
Scientific/Academic Programing
Direct Postage, Freight, Delivery
Direct Supplies 4 General Office
Taxes 4 Insurance
Rent 4 Occupancy
Common Cost Expenses
* Administrative Allocation of
Salaries, Benefits and Overhead
Charges of Conraunications Personnel
1981-82
Approved
ChemCAP
Budget
555,800
99,700
70,700
9,200
9,900
-0112,000
-0-0120,000
180,000
555,800
99,700
70,700
9,200
9,900
120,000
292,000
276,100
160,000
436,100
11,000
46,000
87,100
123,500
150,000
40,000
86,000
50,000
20,000
50,000
60,000
-Git
150,000
40,000
86,000
50,000
20,000
50,000
202,500
11,000
46,000
87,100
123,500
412,100
S 1,131,400
3 1,328,100
2,631,900
2,631,900
S 5,091,400
CMA 037744
EXHIBIT B
DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING
DOMESTIC INTERNATIONAL SALES CORPORATIONS (DISC)
CMA has learned that the Treasury Department is considering
a modification of the Domestic International Sales Corporation
(DISC) provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. This consideration
has arisen because of allegations by European Common Market members
that the DISC provision violates the GATT Subsidies Code.
Under present law, the DISC provisions permit a corporation
to defer current U.S. income taxation on up to one-half of its
export profits so long as those profits are devoted to export
related activities.
In 1979, the latest year for which official
Treasury Department figures are available, the chemical and
allied products industries deferred $288.4 million in taxes from
DISC sales or 1.5 percent of total gross receipts. At issue,
however, is not only the value of the current tax incentive for
DISC related activities, but the tax treatment of previously
deferred DISC income.
Since the DISC provisions were enacted in
1971, total tax deferrals could be substantial for many CMA
member companies.
At the September meeting, CMA's Board of Directors expressed
its concern over developments related to DISC and directed the Tax
Policy Committee to review this problem and to develop an appropriate
CMA response and strategy. On October 14, 1981, the Foreign Tax
Task Group met on DISC and a representative will present a status
report to the Board at its November meeting.
In the interim, CMA
President Robert A. Roland has written directly to Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan to stress the prime importance of DISC
to the chemical industry and CMA's desire to be consulted in the
development of this legislation.
Action Required:
None.
For information only.
CMA
CMA 037745
1
EXHIBIT C
REPORT ON DISC
REPORT OF THE TAX POLICY
COMMITTEE ON DISC
CMA enthusiastically applauds the decision of the Reagan Administration
to continue its support of the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code which
pertain to Domestic International Sales Corporations (DISC).
For some time the Treasury Department and the Office of the Special
Trade Representative had considered proposals to modify the DISC provisions.
This review stemmed from allegations of our major European trading partners
that those provisions violate the GATT Subsidies Code.
It is understood that the GATT Council may make a final decision in the
near future on whether DISC violates GATT. It Is possible that such a decision
could be delayed for an 18-24 month period. CMA is most encouraged that the
Administration will vigorously defend the DISC provisions. However, if it Is
ultimately decided that DISC violates GATT, the United States will be faced
with repealing or replacing OISC, or retaining DISC and allowing GATT members
to impose countervailing duties and to take trade reprisals. This would prob­
ably result in GATT becoming a weakened International organization.
The DISC issue is very important to the economics of the U.S. chemical
industry. Export sales comprise a significant portion of total industry sales,
and export profits are likewise significant. The elimination of the DISC
provisions would substantially affect the ability of the U.S. chemical industry
to compete In International markets. Moreover, if DISC were eliminated and
accumulated earnings were made subject to tax, chemical companies would see
a substantial plunge in available capital and earnings reported to shareholders
in that year because of payment of the tax or an increase In tax reserves.
It is possible that DISC could be replaced by a different export incentive,
such as a foreign International sales company. Regardless of what Is proposed,
ongoing industry effort will be required to ensure that any DISC replacement
is at least as beneficial as DISC. The key questions that must be considered
in this regard are the treatment of existing tax deferrals and Intercompany
pricing rules.
In view of these considerations, the Tax Policy Committee recommends that
CMA take the following positions with respect to DISC:
CMA supports DISC as the minimum response of the U.S.
Government to an effective export policy. CMA and
CMA 037746
member companies should urge Secretary Regan. Ambassador
8rock, and other representatives of the Government not to
concede that OISC might violate GATT. European countries
should be made to understand that the United States believes
that DISC Is not as strong an export incentive as the effect
of the tax systems of those countries and that the United
States Is committed to and will provide an Incentive no
less strong than DISC.
CMA should, however, direct its Tax Policy Committee to
study, develop, and pursue alternative export Incentives
so that CMA could respond Imnediately with an acceptable
alternative to any action of GATT, the Treasury, or the
Congress that might lead to a likely repeal of DISC.
In its activities, the Tax Policy Conmlttee believes it
should pursue three fundamental principles. First, Any
alternative export Incentive shall be at least as beneficial
to exports on an overall basis as the present DISC provisions.
Second. Any alternative export incentive must contain
clear and equitable principles for the pricing of exports
along the lines of section 994 of the DISC rules. Third.
There should, be no tax Imposed as part of any changeover
to an alternative entity on present accumulated DISC
earnings. More than $10 billion in current U.S. corporate
Income taxes may have been deferred by American Industry
through the operation of the DISC provisions. Of this
amount the chemical Industry has deferred more than $1
billion In taxes that would be Imnedlately charged
against earnings reported to shareholders under generally
accepted principles of accounting if the DISC provisions
are repealed.
The Tax Policy Comnittee will report to the Board of
Directors should a change In circumstances occur that
necessitates reconsideration of the policy described
herein.
CMA
CMA 037747
I
EXHIBIT D
Survey of CMA Companies:
the effect of the Reagan Tax Cuts on
Research 4 Development
The
that CMA
Reagan's
a survey
would be
CMA board of directors, at their. September 29, 1981 meeting, directed
attempt to develop concrete means to express support for President
economic programs. To accomplish this, staff was directed to conduct
to determine what effect the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
likely to have on company Investment for research and development.
With the cooperation of several member company experts, CMA staff has
developed a short questionnaire which seeks to determine any chahges
anticipated in R 4 0 budgets as a result of the Tax Act. The questionnaire
also seeks to determine the likelihood of shifts in R & 0 activities
from foreign subsidiaries to U.S. firms. Confidentiality of all responses
will be maintained. This is being done to determine if company size has
any effect on the amount of resources alloted to R 4 0 activities.
It is anticipated that the questionnaires will be mailed to CMA
Executive Contacts the last week In October, with a requested return date
of November 16. The tabulated results are anticipated by Oecember 1.
All CMA members are urged to complete the questionnaire so that a
strong consensus on this Issue can be reached.
Action Required:
None.
For Information only.
CMA
CMA 037748
EXHIBIT E
IMPACT SPECIAL COMMITTEE
Subject
The Public Risk Analysis Special Committee
(PRASC) has fulfilled the requirements of
its Charter and should sunset. A new Reg­
ulatory Impact Special Committee should be
formed to develop appropriate methodologies
for use in regulatory impact analysis byCMA.
Objective
To form a Special Committee which can help
CMA support the Administration's regulatory
policy more fully, and function within the
guidelines of CMA's Policy for Regulatory
Impact Analysis of Health, Safety and Environ­
mental Regulations.
Recommendations
That the CMA Executive Committee sunset the
Public Risk Analysis Special Committee and
approve the attached charter for a new spe­
cial committee, the Regulatory Impact Special
Committee (RISC).
The list of proposed com­
mittee members will be sent to the Executiv
Committee under separate cover.
Action Required
Sunset PRASC and approve the charter for RISC.
r
Time:
Date:
From:
J
□ Telephoned
□ Wants to see you
□ Returned your call
□ Please call
□ Will call again
□ URGENT
CMA
CMA 037749
REGULATORY IMPACT SPECIAL COMMITTEE
CHARTER
Under the Regulatory
Safety and Environmental
Impact Analysts
Regulations
Policy for Health,
approved by the Board of
Directors and within the limits of authority specified
Executive
Committee,
develop appropriate
analysis by CMA.
promote
agencies,
an
other
Commlttee
wl11
define
methodologies for use In regulatory
The Special
with organizations
will
the Special
active
Committee will
In regulatory
exchange
of
maintain
Impact
Information
associations,
and
by the
impact
liaison
analysis,
with
chemical
and
and
regulatory
and
allied
industrles.
Among Its members the Special
Committee
shall
have
repre­
This
method
analysis
across
sentatives from other appropriate CMA committees.
of committee structure would Insure consistent
the spectrum of CMA Interests.
CMA
CMA 037750
REGULATORY IMPACT SPECIAL COMMITTEE
Nominees
Mr. Jackson 3. Browning (CHAIRMAN)
Onion Carbide' Corporation
2.70 Park Avenue
New York, NY 100X7
Mr. William K. Newbury
Conoco Inc.
High Ridge Park
Stamford, CT 06904
Mr. Anthony DiBattista
CIBA-GEIGY Corporation
Saw Mill River Road
Ardsley, NY 10502
Mr. Thomas H. Rhodes
Exxon Chemical Americas
Houston, TX 77001
Mr. H. Granville Haight, Jr.
E. I. du Pont de Nemours- ft Company
1007 Market Street - Room 1354
Wilmington, DE 19898
Dr. William R. Richard
Monsanto Company
800 N. Lindbergh Boulevard
St. Louis, M0 63166
The Procter & Gamble Company
Miami Valley Laboratories
Cincinnati, OH 45247
Mr. Charles L. Sercu
The Dow Chemical Company
Washington, DC 20036
Dr. Peter M. Wolkonaky
Standard Oil Company )Indiana
Mail Code 3805
Chicago, IL 60680.
Dr. Ann Baker Jenkins
Environmental Affairs
Allied Corporation
Morristown, NJ 07960
Mr. Rene D. Sentner
Shell Oil Company
Houston, TX 77001
Mr. John McCarthy
Koppers Company, rnc.
1201 Koppers Building
Pittsburgh, PA 15219
Staff Executive:
D. Chris Catheart
CMA
CMA 037751
EXHIBIT P
.MEMBER SERVICES DEPARTMENT
STATUS REPORT
The creation of this department was announced at the January
1981 Board Meeting.
Consequently, it has been in existance
for only 10 months.
It is staffed by one professional and a
secretary.
RATIONALE FOR CREATING DEPARTMENT
The chemical industry has been under critical pressure for
many years by environmentalists, the media and government, both
legislative and regulatory.
As the industry is widely spread across the country, with some
well-defined areas of heavy concentration, these pressures also
have been widely spread. Eventually, the pressures extended
to and were applied by national environmental groups, national
media and the Federal government.
CMA had no formal mechanism at state and local levels to counter
the efforts directed against the industry.
One was needed - a broadly based one to strengthen CMA's advocacy
effectiveness on the national scene. The need became even more
evident with the election of President Reagan and his commitment
to defederalization.
This turning to the states by the Federal government in no way
lessened the absolute necessity for strength in Washington.
It
reaffirmed the need, for now the industry was to face fighting
on 50 fronts (the states) with much of which would take place
lighting the fuse on issues to explode state-by-state right up
to Congress.
In the early '50s, some state and local groups representing
the chemical industry in their respective areas were formed,
largely on their initiative. CMA (then MCA) had an on-again,
off-again love affair with these autonomous organizations.
Some flourished, some died, others were quite passive.
In the
'60s and early '70s, when support was vital, CMA couldn't decid
what to do.
Eventually, those that survived went their own way.
The relationship with CMA was not good.
That was how matters stood in January 1981.
(See attached
brochure: Today, Testerday, Tomorrow, a Brief Look at State
Organizations.)
CMA 037762
DEPARTMENTAL OBJECTIVE
Build a strong, broadly based chemical industry state and local
structure to support CMA at the point of the pyramid in
Washington by:
Developing a close, cooperative association with existing
associations, councils and chemical industry committees;
Helping to found additional similar groups where
warranted;
Working in like manner with the corporate headquarters
of CMA members and, through them, with their plants
in local areas;
Studying the chemical industry, seeking to find
companies eligible for CMA membership and recruit them
through the Membership Committee and the Board, while
working closely with the CMA offices of Secretary and
Treasurer;
Serving CMA through eyes and ears attuned to problems
upon which the Association should act positively;
Acting as the catalyst to bring Association resources
to bear on problems and assure that needed seminars,
symposia, policy positions and programs are fielded
where needed, principally with state organizations.
ACTION TO DATE
Top priority has been given to strengthening existing state
groups and our ties with them.
This priority also included
helping in firming the establishment of four just coming on
stream when the department was created.
The four brought to
18 the number of groups. One, Southern California, has since
merged with the California Chemical Industry Council to constitute
a blanket organization for the state.
It will, however, continue
as a satellite group as most of the plant operations are in the
south, and there is need for it to continue to meet on concerns
peculiar to its area.
(See inside back cover of brochure for
list of groups.)
The newest groups are in New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut
and Tennessee.
with member company personnel, we are working on building
relationships with the chemical groups instituted under the
wings of the Associated Industries of Kentucky and the Virginia
Manufacturers Association.
We also are actively exploring
the possibilites of assisting in the creation of units in North
Carolina, Arkansas and Iowa.
CMA 037763
To help us focus on critical areas, we conducted two studies,
both of which are appended.
The first was divided into two parts.
The initial section
covered the top 26 states as to value of shipments.
All existing
state groups fell into this category.
In conjunction with the
State Activities Division of the Government Relations Department,
we then selected those remaining states most likely to give
the industry problems and ranked them also as to value of
shipments.
This came to 15, and none has a state chemical
group.
Other categories in the study, and ranked, were value added,
number of chemical employees in production, the percent of this
to all manufacturing employees in the state, the percent of
chemical employees to total state population, the number of
CMA companies in the state and the number of their plants,
and the number of CMA companies in the state with $100 million
or more in annual sales.
Of the three states currently under study for new groups,
North Carolina and Iowa fall into the top 26.
Kentucky and
Virginia, with whom we are working as noted earlier, alsp
are in this grouping.
Thus, we either have existing or under
study organizations in 19 of the 26. Those without are targets
and include Indiana, South Carolina, Florida, Georgia, Massachus tts,
Maryland and Wisconsin.
Arkansas falls into the set of 15, ranking
third in value of shipments.
These studies have been distributed to CMA staff for needs
as they see fit and either have or will be given to all state
groups.
The second study, also attached, shows us the participation
by CMA member companies in existing state groups, according
to their membership rosters supplied us by October 1, 1981.
As these groups accept members the year around, it is possible
some CMA member companies have joined or applied or are consider­
ing joining since receipt of rosters.
The brunt of support is borne by 15 to 20 percent of our members.
There are a number with spotty memberships; some with none.
These are targets of opportunity for broadening the industry's
outreach effort.
t
f
To consolidate our efforts to date and to further increase
mutually beneficial working relationships, we scheduled the
First Annual Meeting of State Groups on November 4, the day
following the Semiannual Meeting.
3
i
As of this writing, all but one of the state groups will
participate and there is reason to believe attendance will
be 100 percent.
Kentucky, Virginia and Iowa representatives
also will attend.
j
CMA 037764
an inducement/ each group was provided one "Freebee" to
the Semiannual and State Meetings.
Any additional attendees
bore the full charge.
Indicated attendance/ again as of this
writing, is approximately 40 or more.
as
The program included the vice presidents for technical, legal,
government relations and communications spelling out the services
available to state groups. An equal portion of the program
featured actions by state groups.
One section was devoted to
what they felt they need from us and how needs can be satisfied.
Since the founding of the department, I have visited, on their
home grounds, every existing group at least once.
I have
had two or more visits with a number, speaking at Executive
Committee, Semiannual and Annual Meetings.
The message:
what we are trying to do and the how and why of it. The
reception, without exception, has been gratifying.
They feel
wanted, needed and appreciate the outstretched hand. Any
reluctance has largely been overcome.
Cooperation by all segments of CMA staff has been excellent.
When called upon, response has been thorough and prompt. Also,
there has been no reluctance to call upon Member Services for
assistance in reaching state groups when specific needs exist.
Further, many valuable suggestions have come from various
departments.
ACTION FORECAST
All attending will be asked to critique the First
Annual Meeting so that the second can be better,
more fruitful.
New state groups will be formed as needed, and if
possible, as quickly as conditions permit.
The promotion of joint meetings by state groups will
be furthered.
The Texas Chemical Council already
has invited the California Chemical Council to meet
jointly at its Annual Meeting.
If this is successful,TCC plans to continue such efforts with others.
The possibility of two to three regional meetings
of state groups under CMA sponsorship will be studied
and begun, if feasible.
Efforts will continue to help state groups build
membership.
Hopefully, there will be time to institute a state
group newsletter.
Services and visits, as initiated, will continue
as needed.
CMA 037755
Devotion of more time to individual member company
needs and to building CMA membership where cost effective.
ACTION REQUIRED
None - for information only
CMA
BD - November 3, 1981
I
CMA 037766
EXHIBIT G
SPECIAL PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Objectives:
SPAC will advise the Executive Committee
on the acceptance of new programs, ensure
that all special programs are conducted
in a manner consistent with CMA policy
and with the Special Program Guidelines,
and review and make recommendations on
all advocacy programs on individual chem­
ical (s) requested by a program panel or
staff.
Problems:
None
Recommendations:
Extend authorization of SPAC for one year
Impact:
Money:
There will be no dues
impact.
Company Personnel: One representative on
the Committee from each
of 15 companies.
Staff Personnel:
Action Required:
One staff executive co­
ordinating the work of
the committee. No addi­
tional staff required.
Approval of recommendation
CMA
CMA 037757
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SPECIAL PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE REPORT TO THE CMA—
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
1
Proposed New Programs
1
Specific Recommendations to Panels
2
SPAC's Recommendations to the Executive Committee
4
ATTACHMENT I:
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL
PROGRAMS—AN OVERVIEW
Mission
1
Division Summary
Staff Organization
1
and Responsibilities
2
Budget
3
Goals for 1981-82
Long-range Plan
5
Major Accomplishments
6
Summaries of Programs
8
Table 1:
Biomedical and Environmental
Programs Budget Summary
Figure 1:
Biomedical and Environmental Special Programs
Division—Organization Chart
Appendix A:
Special Programs Advisory Committee (SPAC)
Appendix B;
List of Special Programs
Appendix Cs
Companies Participating in Sp cial Programs
CMA 037768
SPECIAL PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
REPORT TO THE
CMA EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Since its first nesting in January, 1980, the Special Programs
Advisory Committee (SPAC) developed guidelines for Che conduct of special
programs, reviewed all of the ongoing special programs, and made
recommendations on all proposed new programs. Significant recommendations
resulting from SPAC's reviews are summarized below,
PROPOSED NEV PROGRAMS
Arsenic
SPAC recommended approval of a new program on Arsenic.
The primary
objective of the program is the education of people within regulatory
agencies through a jointly sponsored arsenic symposium with the National
Bureau of Standards. This symposium (November 4-6, 1981) will provide a
means for Industry and government agencies to come to an understanding of
cost-effective regulation of arsenic as a hazardous material through
knowledge of production and use patterns, toxicologic properties, and the
presence of arsenic in the environment.
Ethylene Oxide
The Ethylene Oxide Industry Council was formed to (1) develop information
regarding responsible industry programs to control exposure to ethylene
oxide; (11) to develop relevant scientific, technological, and economic
data; and, (ill) to present such Information and data to U. S. governmental
bodies considering regulatory controls pertaining to ethylene oxide so as
to assure that such standards, regulations or policies are reasonable,
scientifically sound, and economically and socially effective.
SPAC
recommended approval of the formation of this Council*
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
Under the Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee (CRAG) companies affected
by che Court's decision on Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) initiated two
surveys to provide EPA with information for promulgating a final
regulation. The estimated cost of these surveys and other consultant fees
was $163,000; CRAC budgeted the original phase and then asked chat the
program be moved to the Special Programs Division. SPAC approved che first
phase of a PCB special program which will Include conducting two surveys,
analyzing che data from che surveys and participating in formal rulemaking.
CRAC contributed $30,000 toward this effort, SPAC will review the program
at che end of Phase I and will make a recommendation on whether Phase II
should be continued under Special Programs.
New Source Performance Standard on Non-Metalllc Minerals
I>ie to lack of funding, the Environmental Management Committee transferred
a request for a new program on Non-Metalllc Minerals to che Special
Programs Division. Initially the burden of these regulations would have
CMA 037759
b««n on the non-metallic mineral Industry alone, but the precedent would be
set for the regulatory agency to take such actlona on ocher sectors of the
chemical industry. SPAC recommended approval of this program with the
Special Programs division providing all administration and the
Environmental Division providing all technical support. Subsequent to this
recommendation, the SPA, under the new administration, decided not to
pursue the proposed regulation, and therefore, the SPAC recommendation was
not brought to the Executive Committee.
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS TO PANELS
Acrylonitrile
In 1975 CMA signed a $576,300 contract to Investigate the possible toxic
effects and the pharmacodynamics of ingested and Inhaled acrylonitrile in
laboratory animals.
In 1973 the contract was amended and the contract
amount raised to $647,900. The contractor submitted the report on the last
phase of this study on December 9, 1980. At the same time, the contractor
submitted a final Invoice containing a cost-overrun of $134,000.
CMA has
Initiated balloting of panel members to determine if they approve payment
of this cost overrun. Several ballots remain outstanding.
Upon SPAC's
recommendation the CMA legal department confirmed that CMA is not
reponslble, under the terms of the contract, for the overrun.
Although
several companies have still not responded with their ballots, staff and
CMA counsel are working closely with the contractor and the panel to
resolve the cost overrun.
Chlorobenzenes
When EPA issued a TSCA Section 4(a) Draft Test Rules Package on
chlorobenzenes two CMA groups became Involved. The CRAC Testing Task Group
identified broed policy and legal Issues and spoke with EPA regarding the
precedent-setting Implications* The program panel, which has always been
research-oriented, established a Toxicology Regulatory Task Group to
address specific toxicological Issues concerning the six chlorobenzenes
recommended for Immediate testing.
In addition, SOCMA formed the
Chlorobenzenes Producers Association to assume an advocacy position.
All
of these groups worked together to form a unified Industry position on the
Test Rules Package. SPAC recommended that these groups continue with the
work they have begun until the Federal Register notice comes out.
SPAC
further recommended that as most of the companies participating in CMA
(research) and SOCMA (advocacy) programs are the same, a consideration be
given to bringing both the chlorobenzenes research and advocacy programs
under one umbrella organization at an appropriate time.
Ethylene Dibromlde
Audits of the MCI and NIOSH studies were completed and an independent
auditor found that both of these studies were acceptable. SPAC, therefore,
on August 25, 1981, supported the panel's decision to disband although they
suggested a new panel be formed to continue for advocacy.
Following this
decision, OSHA received a petition from the Teamsters Union to lower the
exposure limit on EDB from 20,000 ppb to 15 ppb. SPAC reviewed plans for a
reconstituted panel on October 20, 1981',
2
CMA 037760
Fluorocarbons
SFAC approved a limited advocacy role for the Fluorocarbons Program Panel
so chat the panel could make statements on science.
The first was in
response to the November 1979 NAS Report, "Stratospheric Ozone Depletion by
Halocarbons: Chemistry and Transport."
SPAC recommended that the panel continue its limited advocacy charter and
appointed two members to explore appropriate means of coordinating the
Alliance, the CMA Fluorocarbons Panel and the CMA Section 4 Testing Task
Force of the Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee.
Ketones
SPAC endorsed the panel's plans to establish an early dialogue with EPA
regarding the anticipated TSCA Section 4(a) rule.
However, SPAC
recommended that the panel's charter be amended to Include epidemiologic
studies and possible evaluation of the environmental effects of ketone.
Phthalate Esters
In early 1980 the Phthalate Esters panel planned a material handling survey
of the manufacturers, distributors and users of phthalates. However, since
CMA is a trade association representing manufacturers, SPAC recommended
that all action be cabled until the Society of the Plastics Industry could
be contacted. In the meantime a study by the National Cancer Institute
became available which for the first time raised health affects concerns
for phthalate esters.
In addition, based upon NCI's findings, EPA
requested additional information on PMNs for phthalate esters.
The panel
was concerned that EPA had taken regulatory action on preliminary
information and that EPA might come up with an unreasonable TSCA section
4(a) rule. SPAC recommended that the panel add advocacy to Its charter and
that they establish a dialogue with EPA on developing a voluntary- test
standard.
This was a valuable recommendation as can be seen by the
subsequent accomplishments of this panel (section 7.4 of the attachment).
Titanium Dioxide
SPAC recommended that in the absence of any significant findings in the
long-term Inhalation study in progress at duPont, the pmnel consider
disbanding.
Vinyl Chloride
The Vinyl Chloride Panel hired an independent consultant to review the work
performed by Industrial Bio-Test (IBT) under contract to CMA.
This
consultant recommended that CMA examine animal tissues still available from
the study. The panel did not act upon this recommendation. However, they
did ask IBT for a refund of the $130,000 they had already paid under Che
contract. The panel was waiting for financial resolution with IBT before
submitting a final report to government agencies.
SPAC recommended that
the panel not wait for resolution before submitting a final and report chat
they act up a th
consultants recommendation to do additional
histopathology. The Panel followed this rec mmendatlon.
3
CMA 037761
Zinc Dialkyl Dlthlophosphata
SPAC heard a proposal for a new special program on ZDDP. Although this new
panel urns interested in studying the reproductive role of ZDDP in rats and
rabbits SPAC recommended that they consider undertaking an epidemiological
study.
SPAC approved the panel's draft charter with a strong
recommendation that it be expanded to include advocacy. The panel followed
this recommendation.
SPAC'S RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
SFAC's review of ongoing special programs, as well as proposals for
new programs, concentrated on scientific and policy Issues, the adequacy of
professional and financial support from participating companies, the
availability of CMA resources, and the inclusion of advocacy in the panels'
charter.
The first year of reviews under the new Special Programs Guidelines
provided the members of SPAC with valuable insight into the workings of
program panels. In the future, SPAC will concentrate on the significant
activities of the panels since their last meeting with SPAC.
SPAC will
also make sure chat recommendations made during previous reviews were acted
upon. Staff will keep SPAC informed of new actions as they occur, rather
than waiting for a scheduled meeting.
Further background on the functioning of the Special Programs
Division, its major accomplishments during the past year, and a summary of
each program is attached to this report.
SPAC has now completed its first year, as authorized by the Executive
Committee.
SPAC is performing a valuable oversight function for CMA
Special Programs and I therefore recommend re-authorization of this
Committee for a second year.
CMA
4
CMA 037762
1
ATTACHMENT 1
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS
AN OVERVIEW
MISSION
Th« mission of the CMA Biomedical and Environmental Special Programs
Division (Special Programs) Is to provide manufacturers, processors, and/
or users of a chemical or chemicals with the opportunity to support collec­
tively research and/or advocacy on specific chemicals.
When referring to
Special Programs, advocacy Involves external communication, not designed
solely for information exchange, that relates to existing or developing
regulations, legislation or litigation. CMA serves participating companies
by providing proper and effective administration of programs.
Scientific Information developed through research programs should pro­
mote the health and safety of the general public and of workers Involved in
manufacturing, processing, and using these chemicals.
All significant
findings and reports of CKA-adminlstared research programs are available to
the public In a timely manner.
2.0 DIVISION SUMMARY
CMA approved the first "special project" in 1972. The Initial special
projects were exclusively research oriented. The Intent at that time was
for CMA to collect and disburse the necessary funds, contract for the
research to be done, and provide meeting facilities and surveillance over
the conduct of the meetings.
The time requirements on CMA staff were
expected to be minimal since the participating companies would provide all
technical expertise and management skills necessary to conduct the pro­
grams. The administration of these programs was assigned to CMA secretar­
ies of several standing committees.
The number of special programs administered by CMA Increased at a mod­
erate rate from 1972 to 1979. By the end of 1979, CMA was administering to
seventeen special programs. Since 1980, requests for CMA to undertake new
special programs have increased considerably. This increase Is due mainly
to increased activities related to the Toxic Substances Control Act, Clean
Air Act and Clean Water Act.
The Special Programs Division presently
coordinates research and/or advocacy for twenty-three special programs.
CMA took its first steps toward advocacy In 1977 when the Benzene Pro­
gram Panel was formed in response to a worker-exposure standard proposed by
OSHA. Industry believed that the scientific studies on which this standard
was based were flawed. The Benzene Panel's Charter was to develop a sound
technical base that could be used by industry to challenge the proposed
regulations. The Benzene Panel’s Charter was expanded in November 1978 to
CMA 037763
1
allow eh« Panal co represent the interests of tha members of CMA bafora
federal and scaca agancias la all maccars ralaclag to safecy and haalch Is­
sues arising out of cha production, raacelon, ralease, packaging, repack­
ing, scoraga, transportation, handling or usa of benzene. Since 1980, fif­
teen program panels have broadened chair charters to include advocacy or
begun programs which included advocacy*
In September 1979, cha CMA Executive Committee authorized cha forma­
tion of a Special Programs Advisory Group (SPAG).
SPAG was subsequently
given tha status of Special Comalctee which is now known as the Special
Programs Advisory Committee (SPAC). Three major responsibilities of SPAC
are: (1) co review requests for individual product advocacy by special pro­
gram panels and determine that appropriate conditions for these advocacy
positions are met; (2) to review each ongoing special program at least once
a year to provide guidance based on SPAC members' expertise; and, (3) to
make certain that advocacy actions of each Special Program are in harmony
with CMA Standing CommLttae positions.
Appendix A lists current members
of SPAC.
During 1981, SPAC completed review of all ongoing special
programs.
In addition, in 1980 and 1981, SPAC approved CMA undertaking new
special programs on arsenic, ethylene oxide, glycol ethers, ketones, poly­
chlorinated biphenyls, and zinc dialkyl dlthlophosphates.
Appendix B lists all special programs undertaken by CMA to date.
Appendix C lists companies that are currently participating in special
programs.
3.0 STAFF ORGANIZATION ASP RESPONSIBILITIES
The Special Programs Division has a staff of thirteen, including a
Director, five program administrators, a program coordinator,' five
secretaries, and one word processor*
One program administrator and one
secretary devote their time exclusively to the Fluorocarbon Program.
The
other four program administrators and four secretaries are responsible for
the remaining twenty-two programs. Figure 1 outlines the organization f
Special Programs with respect to both the staff and the specific programs.
Program administrators prepare for and attend panel and task group
meetings, prepare records of meetings, and write and administer all con­
tracts in their respective areas. In addition, program administrators:
o
maintain awareness of pertinent regulations relating to panel's
activities;
o
communicate with government agencies on scientific and regulatory
matters;
o
coordinate information flow to and from the agencies, the com­
panies, other trade associations and academic communities;
o
coordinate the development of advocacy and regulatory position
2
CMA 037764
I
papers with appropriate CMA staff, standing committees, aad
outsIda consultants; and,
o
provide.monitoring and auditing services for ongoing research
projects.
The Special Programs Division keeps the office of General Counsel
informed of the status of ongoing panel activities*
BUDGET
To date CMA program panels have spent $20,430,287 in research and
advocacy programs on 24 families of chemicals (see Table 1).
Overhead Reimbursement Budget
CMA charges participating companies the full costs, including
overhead, for administration of special programs* The program account
is charged $300 per day for professional staff. This charge includes
both the direct and allocated costs of full time professional and
clerical Special Programs staff and routine professional or support
assistance from the Technical, Legal, Government Relations, Communica­
tions, and Administrative Services Departments.
Other direct costs, such as out-of-town travel, meeting room and
program equipment rentals when meeting outside CMA, conference calls,
telex, unusually large printing and mailings, etc., are charged as
miscellaneous administrative expenses to the program.
Other CMA
professional staff time, if required to work on specific or non-rou­
tine aspects of the program, is charged at the same rate as the pro­
gram administrator. In addition to an overhead reimbursement of $300
per day, the CMA Special Programs Division is credited monthly with
0.75Z of received but not expended special program funds as Interest.
Interest received on non-dlsbursed Special Program funds is used to
defray administrative costs not recovered by the dally race.
In the
case of the fluorocarbon program, the unexpended funds balance is
approximately $2 million. This has resulted in a special agreement
with the Program Panel to credit its funds with interest at 9Z and
charge a fixed fee of $16,300 per month from June 1981 to May 1982.
This arrangement produces an effective billing rate of $825 per day
Instead of the normal $500 per day. The fixed fee of $16,500 will be
reviewed in March 1982 for fiscal year 1982-1983.
Panel Research/Advocacy Budget
CMA requires written commitment for the full amount of a
study budget from all participating companies before executing
study eontrsct(s). A separate account is established to receive
and disburse funds for each program.
3
CMA 037765
As a matter of CMA fiscal policy, participating companlas
are invoiced for a minimum of 502 of the projected fiscal year
commitments. Initial invoicing occurs immediately after partici­
pating company management approval of the program activities.
During the course of the program, additional collections are made
as necessary to maintain a reserve from which disbursements are
made. Reserves are maintained as low as possible under sound
financial management.
A new phase of a program begins whenever there is a change
in compoeltlon of sponsoring companies. At the completion of any
phase of a program, uncommitted funds are carried over to a sub­
sequent phase. If a company voluntarily drops out of a program
at the completion of all contracted work, a refund is made if the
pro-rated balance of uncommitted funds exceeds $2,500 for that
company. A company which voluntarily drops out of a program
during an ongoing study is expected to provide its full financial
commitment to the current study phase including any additions or
extensions which were approved during the term of its participa­
tion.
A financial statement detailing all expenses and commitments
is prepared monthly for each program. A copy of the statement is
provided to panel members at their meetings to keep them informed
of the financial status of the panel.
GOALS FOR 1981 - 1982
o to continue working on establishing new coatacts within
regulatory agencies;
o to establish batter communication with both U.S. and noh-D.S.
trade associations involved in activities related to Special
Programs;
o to enhance the scientific credibility of CMA by promoting the
publication of CMA-admlnlstarad research in peer review
journals;
o to achieve better recognition of CMA's eapabllltres by initi­
ating the Special Programs News Letter starting January
o to establish semi-annual meetings with representatives of other
trade associations Involved in administration of toxicologic
and epidemiologic research.
4
CMA 037766
LONG-RANGE PLAN
Through much hard work ou Che pare of CMA staff and panel members',
CMA-adminiseered research Is developing a reputation for Its objectivity
and Integrity. However, there Is room for Improvement.
Special Programs
needs to increase the chemical industry's awareness that Special Programs
has the expertise to:
o administer research and advocacy programs; and,
o provide scientific services which, until recently, have not been
available, expected, or requested.
To accomplish this. Special programs has identified steps which, should
be taken over the next few years. These Include:
o reducing the work load per program administrator to enable him/her
to undertake the challenge of new casks/programs;
o encouraging staff, through educational benefits, to expand existing
and develop new expertise in science and business management;
o hiring new staff to complement existing staff in scientific
disciplines not already adequately covered;
o hiring additional support staff capable of assuming a portion of a
program- administrators non-scientlflc administrative duties in order
to permit the program administrator to devote more time to
scientific and liaison functions;
o playing a larger role in penetrating the Washington scene and
interacting with regulatory agencies and professional societies by
establishing good professional relationships with peers In the
regulatory agencies, the Industry, and government-funded research
laboratories;
o utilizing the contacts and experience of individual program
administrators more effectively within the Special Programs Division
and ocher Divisions of CMA;
o completely reevaluating the method of compensating CMA for services
provided;
o developing the flexibility to provide services panels expect and for
which they are willing to pay; and,
o publicizing Special Programs accomplistazents and capabilities in:
CMA News
ChemEeology
The newly-proposed Special Programs Newsletter
Peer review journals (publication of research results)
News releases on significant findings
5
CMA 037767
MAJOR ACCOMPLISHMENTS
7.1 Chlorobenzenes
Panel toxicologists provided eechnlcal input to the Chloro­
benzenes Producers Association (CPA) for their submission to EPA
in response to EPA's proposed TSCA Section 4(a) Test Rule on
Chlorobenzenes. This group of panel toxicologists has continued
to work closely with the CPA in the development of a voluntary
industry testing program that wjuld be acceptable by EPA in lieu
of formal test rule.
Following earlier dialogues between CMA/CPA and SPA a
‘’decision-tree'* approach to tasting of commercial chlorobenzenes
was adopted. The outline for this proposal is now being reviewed
by EPA. The testing program as now envisioned would be much more
conservative in scope than that originally outlined by EPA in
their proposed Test Rule.
7.2 Ethylene Oxide
The EO council Is organized In such a way that it is able to
respond immediately to emergency situations. A petition to OSHA
to issue an emergency temporary standard of 1 ppm was submitted
on August 13. 1981. Within two weeks the Council, working on
advice from its regulatory and scientific committees and outside
counsel, prepared a precise, detailed response which they sub­
mitted during a meeting with OSHA on September 2.
This meeting
was also attended by the American Hospital Association and the
Veterans Administration-both of which were anxious to join with
the Council to present a united Industry position. On September
29 OSHA denied the petition.
Fluorocarbons
o
The Program has made substantial contributions to the scien­
tific understanding of what is happening la the stratosphere.
The calculated ozone depletion at steady state (approximately
100 years from now) has fluctuated between 5Z and more chan
20Z. Current calculations indicate 6Z.
o
The Program has achieved a reputation for scientific objec­
tivity and integrity seldom attributed to industry-sponsored
effort.
o
There has been cooperation with government agencies through­
out the world and with international agencies. Research con­
ducted by government agencies has been funded or co-funded
and research with universities or private laboratories has
been co-funded with government support.
o
CMA is the only member of the Coordinating Committee on the
Ozone Layer of the United Nations Environment Program not
6
CMA 037768
4
representing a aacioaal government or aa Inceraatlonal
agency.
o
Perhaps che greacest coatritauclon has been Che Influence on
Che government funded stratospheric research, particularly In
che U.S. The productivity of government agency research has
been Improved substantially over Che past five years. At
least In part this has been due to the methodology followed
and advocated by the Industry-sponsored program and the
oversight and review provided by the Fluorocarbon Program
Panel.
7.4 Phthalate Esters
o
The Phthalate Esters Program Panel has developed a voluntary
test Program to address potential health and environmental
effects of a class of compounds.
o
The panel has worked with che Test Rules Development Branch
(TRDB) of che Environmental Protection Agency and has gained
their acceptance of the test program.
TRDB is currently
proceeding with agency review of the program and we expect
official acceptance by mid-November.
o
The Panel Is optimistic that EPA will decide that the data do
not warrant a 4(f) finding at this time*
o
The FDA Task Group has developed a voluntary cast program for
DEHA which is aimed at determining che cause of the bioassay
results. This program will be presented to FDA with the hope
chat che FDA will accept the program in lieu of an Interim
regulation or ban on DEHA.
o
The FDA Task Group has successfully altered che elme table
within th# Bureau of Foods for regulatory action on DEHA.
This delay has allowed FDA and CMA scientists to discuss the
scientific issues to develop mutually acceptable regulatory
actions to assure public safety and che continued use of an
unreplaceable substance, DEHA, In food contact applications.
7.5 Polychlorinated Biphenyls
There has been a spirit of mutual cooperation between CMA
and EPA since che beginning of this program. EPA representatives
worked with CMA in developing our surveys and presenting a sym­
posium on these surveys to Industry and other trade association
representatives.
o
CMA obtained the cooperation of almost SOX of Its membership
in the 50 ppm Incidental generation survey.
7
CMA 037769
o
CMA has continued co maintain on opsa dialogue with ochar
crada associations involved la collactlag data for EPA—
especially tha National Electrical Manufacturers Association
and tha Edison Electric Institute.
o
CMA submitted to EPA a narrative dissertation on tha problems
and costs associated with low level PCB analysis.
This
report was well accepted by the Agency and received good
coverage in several trade publications.
o
In order to insure the objectivity of the data generated by
its current round robin, CMA secured the participation of
several EPA laboratories in addition to member company labs.
It is hoped that the data generated from this cooperative
effort will demonstrate to EPA the variability of analytical
results which must be considered la writing and enforcing a
regulatory cut off level for' PCBa.
SUMMARIES
Special Program Advisory Committee
The Special Program Advisory Committee (SPAC) was formed to
provide the Program Panels with multi-disciplinary expertise in
areas of scientific research and governmental advocacy.
SPAC
reviews each special program on an annual, basis and once a year
reports to the CMA Executive Committee on the progress f each
program*
Controversies which exist either within a panel or between
staff and panels which cannot be resolved at staff level, are
brought to SPAC for review and recommendation. SPAC reviews all
new and revised programs for consistency with Association
policy.
Acrylonitrile (AN)
The Arerylonltrlle Program is concerned with the
epidemiology, toxicology, and environmental aspects of processes
involving acrylonitrile, its copolymers and its end products.
The program was begun in 1974 to develop additional data on the
toxicology of AN. This was accomplished through animal exposure
studies by inhalation and ingestion.
An epidemiology study was not conducted because of lack of
specific exposure data for most of the period to be studied as
well as difficulties associated wlch designating a suitable
control group. Several participating companies conducted their
own internal epidemiology studies, three of which have been
published in detail.
8
CMA 037770
FDA has been interested la food-contact applications of AN
polymers, «specially beverage bocclas.
However, cha Panal did
aoc assume an advocacy position on this Issue.
The Society of
Plastics Industry conducted advocacy related- to OSHA regulations
on AN, but CMA was not Involved.
As a result of proposed regulations by EPA In 1980, the
monomer and polymer producers decided to charter a new
organization under SOCMA to fulfill the necessary advocacy role.
This new group will also perform any future research on
Acrylonitrile. The CMA panel voted to disband upon completion of
Its current research.
Allyl Chloride
Concern over the carcinogenic hazard attributed to vinyl
chloride prompted the formation of the AC Program Panel in Jan­
uary, 1976. The panel has so far undertaken three research pro­
jects: a teratology study, a pharmacokinetic and metabolic study
and a 90-day inhalation probe study.
The need for additional
research will be determined after the results of these studies
are evaluated.
An Arsenic Program Panel was established In the first quar­
ter of 1981. The panel's objectives are to:
1) gather Informa­
tion; 2) conduct necessary research to compliment existing infor­
mation; 3) educate regulators; and 4) undertake regulatory advo­
cacy.
The panel's first priority was to sponsor an arsenic symposlias and an in-depth critical literature review on the health
effects associated with arsenic.
The symposium, scheduled for.
November 4-6 in Gaithersburg, Md. is being cosponsored with the
National Bureau of Standards. Session topics include Industrial
sources and uses of arsenic, biomedical and environmental per­
spectives, and epidemiology*
The literature review is underway
November 1981. The penel may Initiate
needs identified in this review and
regarding present and proposed arsenic
and should be completed in
research studies based on
may undertake advocacy
standards.
The Benzene Program Panel was formed In November 1976*
The
Panel assessed the data used by NIOSH and OSHA in proposing work­
place standards for benzene, developed its own recommendations,
and gathered additional data to substantiate establishment of a
standard.
9
CMA 037771
Th« panel continues co b« concerned with expansion of the
toxicological and epidemiological data bast, development of
industry guidelines for workplace standards, and health and
safety aspects of EPA's proposed National Emission Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESBAP).
The panel completed a benzene reproduction study which
showed no compound-related adverse effects in male and female
rats exposed to levels up to 3Ox the present workplace standard.
CMA and the American Petroleum Institute have initiated an
extensive 90-day Inhalation study of benzene toxicity in rats and
mice which will be used to set dose levels for a subsequent
two-year chronic benzene study.
An epidemiology study of
approximately 14,000 workers in nine plants should be completed
in 1982*
Butylated Hydroxytoluene (BHT)
The BHT Panel was formed in response to a proposed interim
regulation Issued by the FDA in Hay, 1977. The panel's goal is
to collect toxicological information on BHT and to recommend
research to fill any data gaps which might exist.
An Agency Proposal Pending was published on December 31,.
1979, but the final rule is still not out. The panel expects FDA
to recommend that only a 90-day subchronic study be undertaken.
The panel is waiting for U.S. government action before caking
further action on BHT.
The French government recently began phasing out BHT as a
direct food additive and is at present reviewing the use of BHT
as an indirect additive. The joint FAO/WRO Expert Committee on
Food Additives recently extended the temporary Average Dally
Intake (ADI) for BHT, pending receipt of additional testing
data.
Chlorobenzenes (CB)
The Chlorobenzenes Program Panel began its program in 1974
with the conduct of a worldwide literature search on available
health data regarding monochlorobenzene (MCB), ortho-dichl robenzene (ODCB) and para-dlchloro benzene (PDCB).
Since that
time, the panel has been concerned with expanding the toxico­
logical data base on these three compounds and has recently added
a fourth (1,2,4-trlchlorobenzane) to a proposed test program.
In October 1980, the panel initiated a series of teratology
studies on MCB, ODCB and PDCB in rats and rabbits. To clarify
results obtained in the MCB study in rabbits, a follow-up study
was conducted in this species. A draft final report on both MCB
studies is expected by the end of the year. The ODCB research was
completed and interim data are being assembled; animals go on
test in the PDCB teratology study in November 1981.
10
CMA 037772
The panel has worked closely vlch Che Chlorobenzenes
Producers Association (CPA) In formulating comments on EPA's
proposed rules for testing of chlorobenzenes under TSCA Section
4(a). The CPA has held a series of discussions with EPA in an
effort to develop a voluntary industry-sponsored testing program
in lieu of a formal test rule. A proposal outline was developed
and submitted to the Agency. If approved, the CPA has asked the
panel to provide funding and administration for the program.
Epoxy Resin (ER)
The Special Program on Epoxy Resins was approved in July,
1977. The panel was formed to evaluate the available health
effects literature on Epoxy Resins and to sponsor necessary
research.
Initially, the panel decided to concentrate on
Blsphenol-A eplchlorohydrin-derlved epoxy resins.
10
The panel is initiating an advocacy role by requesting that
OSHA remove Blsphenol A diglycIdyl ether from OSHA's candidate
carcinogen list.
Ethylene Dibromide (BOB)
Concerned about possible government regulatory action, the
panel was formed in 1979.
On December 14, 1977, EPA Issued a
Notice of Rebuttable Presumption Against Registration (RPAR).
The agency concluded that presumptions for oncogenicity, muta­
genicity and reproductive disorders had not been rebutted.
A subchronic Inhalation study conducted by Dow Chemical
Toxicology Research Laboratory showed that repeated subchronle
exposure of rats to 10 or 40 ppm of EDB induced pathologic
changes in the respiratory epithelium of the nasal turbinate.
Subsequent post-expoeure phase revealed a lack of progression of
the lesions, with almost complete reversion toward normal
histologic appearance of the nasal turbinate.
Two additional studies were conducted by the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) and the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH). The panel conducted third-party
auditing of both of these studies. The Independent auditor found
chat both studies were of acceptable quality and their findings
valid. Since EDB wee shown to be carcinogenic in both studies,
there is no need for either continued research or an advocacy
program. The panel therefore decided to disband.
However, the
panel has been reactivated as a result of the National Brother­
hood of Teamsters' petition to OSHA to lower the current worker
exposure standard from 20,000 ppb to 15 ppb.
n
CMA 037773
8.10 Ethylene Dichlorida (gDC)
Th« Ethylene Dichlorida Program Panel was formed la Febru­
ary, 1975 Co evaluate cha adequacy of knowledge relating to EDO.
The panel Initiated a chronic Inhalation, a metabolic, and a
teratogenic study la experimental animals. The Panel decided to
disband, pending the acceptance of all final reports on this
research. This decision was reversed when it was learned chat
EPA was considering proposing a TSCA Section 8(a) rule.
8.11 Ethylene Oxide (EO)
A study conducted at Bushy-Run labs showed Ethylene Oxide to
be carcinogenic In rats. Industry was Interested In gathering
information on the safe handling of Ethylene Oxide which led to
the formation of the Ethylene Oxide Industry Council on July 30,
1981. The Council operates through an Executive Committee and
four operating committees: Scientific, Regulatory, Finance and
Membership, and Communications.
The Council Is developing information regarding responsible
industry programs to: 1) control exposure to ethylene oxide; 2)
to develop relevant scientific, technological and economic data;
and, 3) to cooperate with other national and international organ­
izations having similar objectives.
The Council.will present
this Information and data to any United States federal, state or
municipal governmental body considering regulatory controls o
ethylene oxide so as to assure that such standards, regulations
or policies, are reasonable, scientifically sound, and economi­
cally and socially effective.
The Council developed a response to the petition filed by
the Public Citizen Health Research Group and the American Fed­
eration of State, County and Municipal Employees to lower the
exposure standard for ethylene oxide.
The petition asked that
the eight hour TWA be lowered from 50 ppm to 1 ppm and that a
short-term exposure level of 5 ppm be established. Representa­
tives of the Council mat with OSSA officials on September 2 to
discuss Industry's eoacern regarding the petition. On September
29 OSHA denied the petition.
8.12 Fluorocarbons (FC)
The Fluorocarbon Program was formally organized in the
Spring of 1973 with essentially all of the Free World producers
of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) supporting the effort. The panel's
initial purpose was to determine the fate of CFCs in the atmos­
phere and the effects they may produce on plants or animals.
There was no suspicion of their effect on the stratosphere.
With the publication of the Ozone Depletion Theory in June,
1974 che Program was expanded end accelerated.
To date, over
$10,000,000 has been spent oa this research. There is no indica­
tion that the participants intend to curtail this effort in the
immediate future.
12
CMA 037774
The panel lialcs Its funding to scientific research end Its
advocacy to dlsseainatlon of research results and interpretation
of the state of the science. Legislative and regulatory advocacy
Is handled by a coalition of CFC producers and users, the Alli­
ance for Responsible C?C Policy. The Alliance depends on the
Fluorocarbon Prograa Panel for scientific data,
8.13 Glycol Ethers (Gg)
The Glycol Ethers Prograa was foraed on June 26, 1980 and is
concerned prlaarlly with the alkyl and dialkyl ethers of ethylene
glycol and dlethylene glycol, selected ethers of propylene
glycol, and their acetic acid esters.
The panel conducted a
review and evaluation of the published and available unpublished
literature on health and envlronaantal effects.
As a result of
the literature review the panel has developed a multi-phase
testing prograa. This prograa Includes testing of:
Ethylene
Glycol Monooethyl Ether (EM), Ethylene Glycol Monobutyl Ether
(EB), and Ethylene Glycol Mbnoethyl Ether (EE) in 1981 (Phase I)
for teratology and possible reproductive effects. Phase IX will
begin in 1982 and Includes teratology studies on:
Ethylene
Glycol Monoethyl Ether Acetate (EE Acetate) and Propylene Glycol
Monooethyl Ether (PM). Phase II also includes a subchronlc study
of EE and a research study still under development, which will
allow a comparative assessment of glycol ethers with their
acetates. A Phase II testing prograa on other glycol ethers may
be developed in 1982.
The Glycol Ethers Program Panel currently is considering
developing exposure data and has begun a liaison prograa with
NPCA and CSMA. The panel is also considering what role, if any,
they wish to play In an advocacy prograa with EPA and/or OSHA.
Currant advocacy activities involve interactions with NIQSH,
ACGIH, and ECETOC.
In 1979 five ketones, aethyl ethyl ketone (MEK), methyl
isobutyl ketone (MIBK), mesityl oxide (MO), isophorone and
cyclohexanone, were recommended for testing under Section 4(e) of
TSCA by the Interagency Testing Committee. The Ketones Panel met
for the first time on January 23, 1980. Their first activity was
to assemble all toxicology literature on eight ketones, including
the five on the ITC List. Both published and unpublished (from
the files of participating companies) studies were reviewed and
principal areas of deficiencies in toxicology information identi­
fied. Since the Industrial Health Foundation (IHF) already had a
program on cyclohexanone, the present scope of the Ketones Panel
is limited to the four remaining ketones on the ITC List.
A revised EPA schedule resulted from a ruling in favor of
the Natural Resources Defense Council which had sued EPA for
13
non-compliance under Saecloa 4 by aot having initiated rulemaking vichin cha one year deadline. The suit resulted in dead­
lines of 1982 for cyclohexanone and 1983 for the remaining four
ketones. Further rescheduling resulted In deadlines in aid-1982
for all five ketones.
The panel is currently undertaking an
advocacy program on four of the ketones on the ITC List: MEK,
MIBK, MO and lsophorone. The program involves developing use and
exposure information, as well as a voluntary test program.
A 9(Way inhalation study on methyl isobutyl ketone (MX3K)
is currently underway and reproduction and teratology studies are
under consideration. The panel will follow closely complimentary
testing on methyl ethyl ketone by CUT, and methyl isoamyl ketone
by Eastman Kodak. The panel has met once with EPA on testing
recommendations for ketones under Section 4(a) and is developing
a document for submission to the Agency.
The document will
present summaries of toxicity data on the four ketones and use
and exposure information. An overview of the research program
will also be included.
The Phosgene Panel was formed in April, 1975.
Its purpose
is to maximize safety in the production and use of phosgene, to
reduce the possibility of exposure incidents, and to d vel p
effective diagnostic procedures and therapeutic countermeasures.
The panel is studying means for monitoring concentrations of
phosgene in air, means of evaluating actual exposures to phosgene
as a guide to medical treatment, and means of preventing
incidents of phosgene release. Toward this objective, the panel
has funded:
o two animal studies and published two papers in the Archives
of Environmental Health (These studies suggested possible
mechanisms of Phosgene poisoning and candidate therapeutic
o a worldwide literature search; and,
o a third animal study directed toward exposure of candidate
therapeutic agents expected to be effective based on the
literature search or on results from the first two animal
research projects.
In order to improve engineering and safety practices during
the manufacturing or use of phosgene, the panel is structuring
and conducting four surveys to identify and update this informa­
tion. Dupont and Dow have each conducted in-house retrospective
epidemiology studies on workers exposed to phosgene.
The panel
does not currently find it feasible to sponsor a prospective
study due to the absence of a controlled, phosgene-only exposure.
14
CMA 037776
1
To improve worker safety, che panel Is writing with instru­
ment designers and manufacturers to develop instrumentation with
maximum sensitivity for both industrial (process) and personal
monitoring, develop protective clothing, and self contained
breathing devices. The panel is also exploring improved in-plant
safety practices and developing optimal post-exposure diagnostic
procedures and therapeutic countermeasures.
8.16 Phthalate Eaters (PS)
The CMA Phthalate Esters Program Panel, which was formed in
1972, originally concentrated its efforts on studying the
environmental effects of phthalates.
Extensive literature
surveys at that time Indicated little or no concern over the
health effaets of phthalates* The Interagency Testing Committee
recommended only environmental testing on the phthalate ester
class of compounds. Under che provisions of Section 4 of the
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), EPA could develop test rules
for environmental testing; however, the phthalate esters panel
began development of a comprehensive voluntary environmental
effects test program.
As a result of a 1980 draft report from the NCI to the
National Toxicology Program which shows that dl-2-ethylhexyl
phthalate (DEHP; also widely known as DOP) causes hepatocellular
carcinoma at high dose levels in laboratory rodents, phthalate
esters received increased attention from regulatory agencies.
With che disclosure of the new NTP findings, che Program Panel
expanded its efforts to Include a comprehensive testing program
to address che human health concerns. The goal was to develop a
comprehensive voluntary test program that would develop test data
required under Section 4 of TSCA, but without the imposition of
mandatory test rules.
The first phase of the comprehensive environmental effects
and human health effects testing program is ready to be imple­
mented. The human health effects portion has been designed to
examine a limited number of compounds on a risk assessment basis.
The studies which comprise this phase of the program will gener­
ate sound scientific data chat can be applicable to phthalate
esters as a class, rather than to specific chemicals. Allocation
of costs, was developed to include all the affected Industries,
phthalate producers, raw materials suppliers and phthalate users.
The environmental effects testing portion. Includes the 14
phthalate esters produced in large volume. The program Includes
acute testing for all 14 phthalates in three species. Additional
acuta and chronic cast data will be developed for those esters
for which test data is not already available. The Phthalate
Esters Panel has held several discussions with Mr. Newburg-Rlnn
of EPA's Test Rules Development Breach.
As a result of these
discussions, EPA held a public meeting on September 15, 1981 to
propose acceptance of the Panel's 7oluncary Test Program.
Final
15
CMA 037777
acceptance awaits receipt of written comments from the public and
soma further review within the Agency.
In a response to a Citizen's petition filed under Section 21
of TSCA, the EPA Office of Pesticides and Toxic Substances con­
ducted a priority review assessment of DEHP which could result In
a 4(f) Action being taken by the Agency.
The CMA phthalate
Esters Panel is currently working with EPA on this issue.
Phthalate and adipate esters are also of Interest t
three
Bureaus within the FDA, the Bureau of Foods, the Bureau of
Biologies and the Bureau of Medical Devices.
The Bureau of
Biologies and the Bureau of Medical Devices are primarily
Interested In DEHP use In flexible plastics that come In contact
with blood, blood elements or Intravenous solutions.
The Bureau of Foods regulates DEHA for use in plastics chat
come la contact with foods, and DEHP for use in plastics that
contact non-fatty foods. In addition, other adipates, di-(C7,
Cg-alkyl) adipate and dl-n-alkyl adipate (made from Cg, Cg, C^q
alcohols) are sanctioned for use In foods, but foods, but the
sanctions on these latter compounds were based upon saf ty of
DEHA.
In June 1981, a new Task Group (FDATG) was formed within the
Phthalate Ester Panel, to interact with FDA on Issues relating to
adipates and phthalates. At that time the Bureau of Foods was
preparing a strategy document for submission to the FDA commis­
sioner which could have resulted in a restriction or ban of DEHA
In food contact applications.
The Phthalate Esters FDATG met
with representatives of the FDA and successfully delay d the
strategy document* The FDATG is currently preparing a detailed
review of DEHA toxicity data and developing a voluntary testing
program which FDA could accept in lieu of an Interim regulation
or ban on DEHA. Since the Phthalate Esters Panel was originally
organized and funded to address EPA's concerns, the FDATG activi­
ties will be funded separately.
The panel faces the challenge of presenting an industry con­
census on a class of compounds.
Individual participating com­
panies have diverse interests, but all have a common go 1—to
minimize the regulatory action on these substances by responsi­
ble, voluntary programs supported broadly.
8.17 polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBa)
The recent decision in EDF v. EPA, NO. 79-1580, set aside
two parts of EPA's regulation pertaining to PCBs.
The Court
found that EPA did not present substantial evidence to support
its determination to:
1) exclude from regulation materials
containing less chan 50 ppm PCBs and, b) define the statutorily
exempted "totally enclosed uses" as intact and non-leaking. As a
CMA 037778
16
a 21
aca
res
of
of
Uy
act
ic
f
I
result of requescs by EPA and EDP Che Courc decided co stay its
mandate for up co eighteen months. Within this time period EPA
is to collect Information and promulgate a supportable regulation
on PCBe.
CMA staff, with advice from the Chemical Regulations
Advisory Committee (CRAC) and interested company representatives,
negotiated with EPA and EDP to gather information on the 50-ppm
incidental generation issue.
Since CRAC's budget could not
support the data-gathering efforts, Che Special Programs Division
was asked to assume responslbillcy for this project*
The first
panel meeting was held in February, L98L*
The PCB Panel is conducting two surveys of its member com­
panies: 1) 50 ppm incidental generation survey - to characterize
the nature and scope of the low concentrations of PCBs; 2) total­
ly enclosed survey - to identify the numbers of pieces of elec­
trical equipment which contain PCBs, the volume of such PCBs, and
their concentration levels or ranges. The information obtained
from these surveys will be presented to EPA. In August 1981, the
panel submitted to EPA an analytical narrative dissertation dis­
cussing the problems and costs associated with low level PCB
analysis. The panel is currently conducting an analytical roundrobin testing program which Involves both industry and EPA
laboratories.
8.18 Rubber Additives (RA?
The Rubber Additives Program Panel was formed in March 1980
to sponsor research that would expand the .toxicological data base
on rubber chemicals of interest to participating companies.
As an initial effort, the panel sponsored a series of in
vitro tests on purified and commercial samples of 2-(morphoiiaothio) benzothiazolesulfanamide (MBS). Further testing of MBS
is presently under consideration, as is the need for testing of
other rubber additives.
The panel works in close cooperation with both the WTR
(International Working Group on Rubber Chemical Toxicology) and
Che Rubber Manufacturers Association. All three groups have been
concerned with nltrosamlnes in the workplace and the panel is
considering undertaking a testing program on nitrosamlne.
The Styrene Program Panel is expanding the styrene toxicol­
ogy data base. The panel also represents the interests of its
members before federal agencies in matters relating to safety and
health Issues.
A two-year chronic and three-generation reproduction study
of styrene in drinking water was completed and released t
fed17
CMA 037779
aral agencies. Tha panel also ravlawad a draft final raport oa a
styrene pharmacokinetic study in mica. Tha lattar study indicmtad spaclaa dlffarancaa with raapact to acuta atyrana toxicity
in rata and mica. Tha panal prasantly la aaaaaalng bow thaaa
dlffarancaa ralata to man bafora procaadlng further with a
raaaareh program.
Tha panal lncorporatad a Ragulatory Task Group t addrass
EPA's propoaad ragulatlona (NESHAP) for benzene amissions from
achyl banzana/styrana plants commants wara submit tad to EPA on
8.20 Titanium Dloxlda (TD)
In 1977, Du Pont Initiated a ravlaw of tha lltaratura on
titanium dloxlda toxicity and concluded that furthar Information
was naadad to answer possible questions which might be directed
at titanium dioxide. The impact of the Toxic Substances Control
Act also raised concern as to tha adequacy of existing
information.
Tha panel has tentatively concluded that a historical
mortality study is not justified at this time.
The panel plans
to terminate program activities If no new evidence f human
health effects is reported as a result of the two year inhalation
studies being conducted by Du Pont.
8.21 Trichloroethylene (TCE)
The Trichloroethylene Program Panal was formed on May 12,
1975 in response to an MCI Memorandum-of Alert.
Tha panel's
primary concern was a long-term inhalation study. A contract was
signed in 1975 with Industrial BIO-TEST Laboratories (1BT) to
conduct such a study. The testing performed by IBT resulted in a
ntmber of grave inadequacies and a final report was not issued.
Therefore, the CMA TCE Audit Task Group prepared an audit r port.
EPA's Cancer Assessment Group has asked the panel to provide
validation of chamber concentrations for the first 12 to 15
months of the IBT study.
The panel is monitoring the progress of the MCI bioassay on
TCE which Involves several strains of mice and rats.
Although the panel contemplated an epidemiological study,
SOCMA determined that a study population for an epidemiologic
Investigation would be too small to yield statistically signif­
icant results. Therefore, such a study was not conducted.
8.22 Vinyl Chloride (VC)
Since 1972, the Program Panel has supported activities
related to the accumulation and assessment of health and safety
data of vinyl chloride monomer.
18
CMA 037780
After funding several animal studies, the eaphasis on
research shifted from toxicological investigations to the early
diagnosis and clinical management of vinyl chloride-related
injuries.
The panel is also funding an update of a vinyl
chloride epidemiology study of 10,000 workers.
The panel has maintained a close liaison with SPI and
several European-based companies.
The present interest in
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) dust control limits in the UK is being
closely followed. Several months ago QSHA requested information
on PVC dust; however, no notice has been published or other
action taken.
8.23 Vlnylldene Chloride (VPC)
The Vlnylldene Chloride Program Panel was formed in May 15,
1974 to investigate the potential toxicologic effects and pharma­
cokinetics of Inhaled and ingested VDC in laboratory animals.
Dow Chemical, which was planning research on VDC toxicology,
agreed to convert its program into an industry-wide effort.
The
IWo-Year Inhalation Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study of Vlnylldene
Chloride in Rats is stll in progress.
The Work Practices Task Group of the panel prepared a Health
and Safety Work Practices Guideline for Vlnylldene Chloride to
minimise expodufe to VUU.
me uulaeiiaes wets s An C co the
Director of NIOSH and the Project Manager, for Criteria Documents
at SRI. They received no other distribution.
The panel is preparing to respond to a Health Risk Assess­
ment Criteria document on VDC under preparation by the EPA Cri­
teria and Health Assessment Group. OSHA does not have a standard
for VDC and EPA is unlikely to require any further toxicity
testing on VDC under TSCA Section 4.
The pharmacokinetics and metabolism research show a species
sensitivity of Mouse>Rat>Man.
The total data bank indicates
oncogeaicity is not observed without recurrent tissue damage and
without a cytotoxic dose; a tumorlgenic response in man would be
an improbable event.
8.24 Zinc Dialkyl Dlthiophosphates (ZDDP)
The ZDDP Program Panel was chartered in November 1980 to
conduct research on this class of oil additives.
As a first
step, gonadal toxicity studies of three ZDDP compounds were
initiated in immature and mature rats and rabbits.
Obvious species differences were observed between rabbits
and rats with respect to ZDDP toxicity. Consequently, the panel
proposes to conduct a comparative in vivo pharmacokinetic study
19
CMA 037781
la the rat, rabble, and man.
A dose-response study is also
propoaad co dataralna a no-a£fact level la raes and rabbles.
Ia vitro easting of ZDDPs by Individual companlas has shown
that soma manbars of eha class hava genocoxlc pocancial.
The
Program Panal is coasidarlng conducting mutagenicity/carcinoganlciey assays eo further assass this potential.
CMA
20
CMA 037782
TABLE 1
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS BUDGET SUMMARY*
PROGRAM
Acrylonitrile
RESEARCH AND
ADVOCACY COMMITMENT
728,484
ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENSES
79,172
$807,656
309,500
17,186
326,686
Arsenic
10,000
8,600
18,600
Ben2ene
3,048,684
112,262
3,160,946
21,944
29,467
51,411
Chlorobenzenes
370,722
37,952
408,674
Epichlorohydrin
315,032
27,432
342,464
15,059
15,059
10,039
43,032
53,071
288,100
64,449
352,549
15,518
15,518
Glycol Ethers
313,000
15,232
328,232
Ketones
28,977
237,857
Phosgene
217,512
85,728
303,240
Phthalate Esters
186,585
132,628
319,213
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
100,434
18,869
119,303
30,725
17,730
48,455
708,218
66,545
774,763
30,725
23,969
54,694
490,506
89,738
580,244
1,326,562
119,701
1,446,263
Vinylidene Chloride
729,482
57,440
786,922
Zinc Dialkyl
Dithlophosphatas
79,857
12,207
92,064
9,524,991
1,118,893
10,643,884
9,216,650
569,753
9,786,403
$18,741,641
$20,430,287
Allyl Chloride
Butylatad
Hydroxytoiuene
Epoxy Resins
Ethylene Dibromlde
Ethylene Dichloride
Ethylene Oxide
Rubber Additives
Styrene
Titanium Dioxide
Trichloroethylene
Vinyl Chloride
Subtotal
Fluo rocarbons
total
4 Fluorocarbons program from start thru May 30, 1981.
to September 25, 1981.
S
TOTAL
All othar programs start to
CMA 037783
*ahared
Figure 1 - Bloated leal ami Rawlroaaaatal Special Fro«rta« plvlaloo
CMA 037784
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SPECIAL PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE (SPAC)
Hie Gamitbee will:
advise the Executive Ccnmittee on the acceptance of new programs, ensure that all special prafjram«
are conducted in a Manner consistent with CMA policy and with the Special Program Guidelines; and, review and make
reccmnendatione on all advocacy programs on individual chemical (s) requested by a program panel or staff.
TERM ENDING MAY 31, 1982
Borg-Wamex Chemical Corporation, International Center, ParkersLury, W 26101
Monsanto Company, BOO North Lindbergh Boulevard, St. Louis, MO
Shell Chemical Ccnpanyl, p. O. Box 2463, Houston, TX
Chairman*
CIBA-GEIGY Corporation, Ardsley, NY
63166
77001
10502
77001
TERM ENDING MAY 31, 1982
The BFGoodrich Ccmpaiy, 6100 Oak Tree Boulevard, Cleveland, CH
Essex Chemical Corporation, 1401 Broad Street, Clifton, NJ 07015
Stauffer Chemical Coopany, Westport, CT
IMC Chemical Group, 421 East Hawley Street, Mundelein, IL 60060
Ethyl Corporation, 451 Florida Avenue, Baton Rouge, LA
06880
70801
A ppendix A
O
44131
TERM ENDING MAY 31, 1984
Noble
63134
19477
19897
John J. Zimmerman...ARCO Chemical Company, 3801 West Chester Pike, Newtown Square, PA
Staff Executive:
*Through Hay 31, 1982
Hasmukh C. Shah
63119
19073
LIST OF SPECIAL PROGRAMS
NUMBER
PROGRAM NAME
PROGRAM TYPE
Acrylonitrile
Research
06/20/74
Allyl Chloride
Research
08/19/75
Arsenic
Research and Advocacy
01/29/81
Benzene
Research and Advocacy
02/08/77
Bu ty 1 ^tecj^Hy droxyto 1 uene
Research and Advocacy
09/19/77
START DATE
Chlorobenzenes
Research
12/16/74
Eplchlorohydrln
Research
08/19/75
Epoxy Resins
Ethylene Dlbroalde
Research
03/22/79
Ethylene Dichloride
Research
12/17/74
Ethylene Oxide
Research and Afrocacy
04/16/81
Fluorocarbons
Research and Advocacy
04/09/73
Glycol Ethers
Research and Advocacy
06/26/80
Ketones
Research and Advocacy
01/23/80
Phosgene
Phthalate Esters
Polychlorinated Biphenols
Rubber Additives
Research and Advocacy
09/10/79
Styrene
Research and Advocacy
10/24/74
Tltaniun Dioxide
Research
06/13/77
Trichloroethylene
Research
05/12/75
Vinyl Chloride
Vlnylldene Chloride
Zinc Dialkyl
Dlthlopnosphates
Research
Research and Advocacy
Advocacy
Research and Advocacy
Research
08/31/80
01/18/77
05/18/72
02/24/72
02/11/81
11/16/71
05/15/74
Appendix
B
CMA 037787
Research and Advocacy
COMPLETION DATE
Research and Advocacy
10/02/80
Appendix C
COMPANIES PARTICIPATING IN SPECIAL PROGRAMS
ABBOTT LABS
EthyleneOxide
AIR PRODUCTS
Vinyl Chloride
AKZO CHEMIE BV
Fluorocarbons
ALLIED CORPORATION
fluorocarbons, Ketones, Phthalate Esters, Phosgene
Arsenic
AMERICAN CYANAMID
Acrylonitrile, Phthalate Esters, Rubber Additives
AMERICAN HOECHST
Styrene
AMOCO
Benzene, Styrene, Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates
ANACONDA COPPER COMPANY
Arsenic
ARCO CHEMICAL
ftenzene, Phthalate Esters, Polychlorinated Biphenyls
ARCO/POLYMERS
Styrene
ASAHI-DOW LIMITED
Vinylidene Chloride
ASAHI GLASS CO., LTD.
Fluorocarbons, Vinylidene Chloride
ASARCO INC.
Arsenic
ASHLAND CHEMICAL
Benzene
ASSOCIATED OCTEL COMPANY
Ethylene Dibromide
CMA 037788
AUSTRALIAN FLUORINE CHEMICALS PARTY, LTD.
Fluorocarbons
BASF WYANADOTTS
Ethylene Dichloride, Ethylene Oxide, Phosgene, Phthaiate Esters.
BECTON DICKINSON
Ethylene Oxide
BETHLEHEM STEEL
Benzene
BORDEN CHEMICAL
Ethylene Dichloride, Phthaiate Esters, Vinyl Chloride
BORG-WARNER CHEMICALS
Acrylonitrile, Styrene
BRISTOL LABS
Ethylene Oxide
Trichloroethylene
CELANESE PLASTICS SPECIALTIES CO.
Epoxy Resins, Ethylene Oxide
CERTAIN-TEED
Vinyl Chloride
CHESEBROUGH PONDS
Ethylene dxide
CHEVRON
Phthaiate Esters, Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates
CIBA-GEIGY
Epoxy Resins
CONOCO CHEMICALS
Ethylene Dichloride, Ethylene Oxide, Phthaiate Esters, Vinyl
Chloride
COSDEN OIL
Benzene, Styrene
CRESCENT MANUFACTURING CO
fcthylene Oxide
DAIKIN KOGYO CO. LTD.
Fluorocarbons
CMA 037789
DART INDUSTRIES
Butylated Hydroxytoluene
DIAMOND SHAMROCK
Arsenic, Ethylene Dichloride, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Phthalate
Esters, Trichloroethylene, Vinyl Chloride
DOW CHEMICAL
Acrylonitrile, Allyl Chloride, Benzene, Chlorobenzenes, Epoxy Resins,
Ethylene Dibromide, Ethylene Dichloride, Ethylene Oxide, Glycol
Ethers, Ketones, Styrene, Trichloroethylene, Vinyl Chloride,
Vinylidene Chloride
Acrylonitrile, Benzene, Ethylene Dichloride, Fluorocarbons,
Phosgene, Phthalate Esters, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Titanium
Dioxide, Vinylidene Chloride
DU PONT CANADA INC.
Fluorocarbons
ELCO CORPORATION
Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates
EL PASO PRODUCTS COMPANY
Styrene
EASTMAN KODAK
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
ESSEX CHEMICAL (RACON)
Fluorocarbons
ETHYL CORPORATION
Allyl Chloride, Ethylene Dibromide, Ethylene Dichloride, Phthalate
Esters, Trichloroethylene, Vinyl Chloride, Zinc Dialkyl
Dithiophosphates
EXXON
Benzene, Ketones, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Phthalate Esters, Vinyl
Chloride, Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates
FOXMATIC CORP
Ethylene Oxide
GENERAL ELECTRIC
Phosgene, Phthalate Esters, Polychlorinated Biphenyls
GENERAL TIRE & RUBBER
Phthalate Esters, Vinyl Chloride
CMA 037790
I
BFGOODRICH
Allyl Chloride, Ethylene Dichloride, Rubber Additives, vinyl
Chloride, Vinylidene Chloride
GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER
Rubber Additives, Vinyl Chloride
Vinyl Chloride, Vinylidene Chloride
GREAT AMERICAN CHEMICAL
Vinyl Chloride
GREAT LAKES
EthyleneDibromide
GULF CHEMICAL CO.
Acrylonitrile, Benzene, Ethylene Dichloride, Styrene, Vinyl Chloride
GULF & WESTERN
Titanium Dioxide
HALCON
Ethylene Oxide
HOECHST AG/AMERICAN HOECHST
Fluorocarbons
HOOKER CHEMICAL
Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Trichloroethylene, Vinyl Chloride
ICI AMERICAS
Ethyiene Dichloride, Glycol Ethers, Vinyl Chloride
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES PLC
Fluorocarbons, Trichloroethylene
INMONT CORPORATION
fhthalate Esters
ISC CHEMICALS LTD
fluorocarbons
JAPAN FLOW GAS ASSOC.
Fluorocarbons
JOHNSON & JOHNSON
Ethylene Oxide
CMA 037791
KAISER ALUMINUM AND CHEMICAL CORP
Fluorcarbons, Polychlorinated Biphenyls
KALI CHEMIE AG
Fluorocarbons
KENDALL CO
Ethylene Oxide
KEYSOR-CENTURY
Vinyl Chloride
KOPPERS COMPANY
Arsenic, Benzene, Butylated Hydroxytoluene, Phthalate Esters
KUREHA CHEMICAL INDUSTRY
Vinylidene Chloride
LUBRI2QL
Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates
MALLINCKRODT INC
Ethylene Oxide
MICRO BIOTROL
Ethylene Oxide
MITSDI FLOOROCHEMICALS LTD
fluorocarbons
MOBAY CHEMICAL
fhosgene, Rubber Additives
MOBIL OIL CORPORATION
Benzene, Phthalate Esters
MONSANTO COMPANY
Acrylonitrile, Benzene, Chlorobenzenes, Ketones, Polychlorinated
Biphenyls, Phthalate Esters, Rubber Additives, Styrene, Vinyl
Chloride, Vinylidene Chloride
MONTEDISON SPA
Fluorocarbons, Phosgene
MONTROSE CHEMICAL CORP OF CA
Chlorobenzenes
MORTON CHEMICAL
Vinylidene Chloride
CMA 037792
NALCO CHEMICAL COMPANY
Ethylene Oxide
NL INDUSTRIES
Titanium Dioxide
QLIN CORPORATION
Glycol Ethers, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Phosgene, Vinylidene
Chloride
OSMOSE WOOD PRESERVING COMPANY
Arsenic
PANTASOTS
Phthalate Esters
PENNWALT
Arsenic, Fluorocarbons, Rubber Additives
PHILLIPS PETROLEUM COMPANY
Benzene
PPG INDUSTRIES
Chlorobenzenes, Ethylene Dibroraide, Ethylene Dichloride, Ethylene
Oxide, Glycol Ethers, Polychlorinated Biphenyls, Phosgene,
Trichloroethylene, Vinyl Chloride, Vinylidene Chloride
POLYSAR LIMITED
Benzene
PRODUITS CHIMIQUES UGINE KUHLMANN
Fluorocarbons
REICHHOLD CHEMICALS
Epoxy Resins
ROHM & HAAS
Vinylidene Dichloride
RUBICON
Phosgene
SALSBURY LABS
Arsenic
SCM CORPORATION
Titanium Dioxide
SHELL CHEMICAL COMPANY
Ailyl Chloride, Benzene, Butylated Hydroxytoluene, Epoxy Resins,
Ethylene Dichloride, Ethylene Oxide, Glycol Ethers, Ketones,
Phthalate Esters, Vinyl Chloride, Styrene, Zinc Dialkyl
Dithiophosphates,
SHERWIN WILLIAMS
Butylated Hydroxytoluene
CMA 037793
1
SHERWOOD MEDICAL
Ethylene Oxide
SHOWA DENKO KK
Fluorocarbons
STANDARD CHLORINE CHEMICAL CO
Chlorobenzenes
STANDARD OIL (OHIO)
Acrylonitrile, Benzene
STANGE COMPANY
Ethylene Oxide
STAUFFER CHEMICAL
Ethylene Dichloride, Phosgene, Phthalate Esters, Polychlorinated
Biphenyls, Vinyl Chloride
STSPEN CHEMICAL
Phthalate Esters
SUN PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
Styrene
SUNSHINE MINING CO'
Arsenic
TECKNOR-APEX
Phthalate Eaters
TENNESSEE EASTMAN
Acrylonitrile, Glycol Ethers, Ketones, Phthalate Esters, Vinyliden
Chloride
TENNECO CHEMICALS
Vinyl Chloride
TEXACO INC
Benzene, Ethylene Oxide, Glycol Ethers, Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates,
TIOXIDE CANADA, LTD
titanium Dioxide "
TOMS RIVER
Phosgene
TRAVENOL LABS
Ethylene Oxide
UNION CARBIDE
Senzene, Ethylene Dichloride, Ethylene Oxide, Glycol Ethers, Ketones,
rhi CVl0rinated BiPhen7ls' Phosgene, Phthalat Esters, Styren , Vinyl
CMA 037794
UNION OIL OF-CA
Vinylidene Chloride
UNIROYAL, INC.
Acrylonitrile, Butylated Hydroxytoluene, Rubber Additives, Vinyl
Chloride
USS CHEMICALS
Benzene, Phthalate Esters, Styrene
UPJOHN COMPANY
Phosgene
VULCAN MATERIALS
Ethylene Dichloride, Polychlorinated Biphenyls
WITCO CHEMICALS
Phthalate Esters
WARREN CHEMICAL CO
Ethylene Oxide
9/2S/81
CMA 0377*96
EXHIBIT H
TECHNICAL DIRECTOR'S REPORT
Since the last Board of Directors' meeting, the Techni­
cal Director made presentations at the following conferences:
National Solid Waste Management Association
ence on Waste Technology (Boston, MA),
Degree of Hazard*
Management of Uncontrolled Hazardous Waste Sites
(Washington, DC).
Plenary Lecture.
Topic:
Degree
of Hazard.
She participated In media
Detroit, Boston and Providence.
tours
in
San
Confer­
Topic:
Francisco,
The Technical Director Is working actively with the Con­
servation Foundation to develop a hazardous waste siting book­
let for use In local communities.
She also participated as a
member on the Coast Guard's Chemical Transportation Advisory
Committee where an International Superfund was discussed.
(See
Environmental Programs.)
The major activities of the Technical Department -outside of those detailed In the following sections •• centered
on preparation for the Semiannual Meeting and the report for
the Technical Review Committee.
The Review will be on November
CHEMTREC
The next CHEMTREC workshop Is scheduled for Louisville
on November 18-19.
The Director and selected Advisors are
working with Texas AAM to refine their presentation.
They're
working to reduce to a minimum the outside resources required.
This program will continue through the three remaining
developmental workshops.
There are now 18 companies, with 24 stations, on the
"hard copy" network.
Approximately one-third of the total
traffic goes through this system.
The CHEMTREC Advisors met October 28-29 to discuss a
number of matters, including reporting by carriers, and
emergency response outside of the United States.
CMA 037796
i
3
A member survey Indicates that for the 12-month period
ending June 30, 1981, CMA members have improved energy
efficiency by 23.4%, compared with 1972.
ENGINEERING
CMA reviewed and commented on five standards of substan­
tial Interest to the chemical Industry.
They were proposed for
adoption as American National Standards by Underwriters Labora­
tories (UL) and Manufacturers Standardization Society.
CMA's
major concern continues to be adequate safety at reasonable
cost.
Of those reviewed, CMA reaffirmed Its negative vote on
three UL proposals because of Inadequate wire beading space,
which would result In excessive Installation and maintenance
costs.
The Committee Is planning a forum on the causes and
effects of power outages, and cures for them, with a view
towards formulating remedial action.
The Committee Is preparing and selecting a speaker for
the program for the third Process Computer Users Forum to be
held In May 1982.
This forum will build upon what was learned
last time about distributed computer control.
It will also
explore managerial considerations Including use of management
Information systems and scientific computations, and full
utilization of Installed systems.
CHEMICAL REGULATIONS
CRAC has been meeting with EPA In a series of discussions
on CMA's petition requesting exemptions from PMN requirements
for low-volume chemicals, site-limited Intermediates, and
certain polymers.
The meetings have focused on Issues raised
by EPA and data requirements that the Agency believes it needs
prior to proposed rulemaking.
Examples Include definition of a
qualified expert, criteria for polymer exemptions and justifi­
cation for a 25,000 pound cut-off for low-volume exemptions,
among others.
CRAC Intends to complete Its discussions with
EPA by the end of 1981, and looks for EPA proposed rules during
the first quarter of 1982.
CMA staff prepared an economic analysis supporting our
25,000 pound cut-off for low-volume PMN exemptions.
PMNassociated costs were shown to adversely Impact the market­
ability of new chemicals, which, in turn, reduces the
innovative capability of the chemical Industry.
CRAC representat1ves and CMA staff met with Don Clay,
Director of the Office of Toxic Substances (OTS) to discuss
major regulatory Issues under, TSCA.
Mr. Clay has assigned
CMA 037798
4
three of his staff to develop comprehensive EPA programs for
reporting, PMNs, and contract management for OTS activities.
PMN exemptions will be part of EPA's priority programs, which
gives us assurance that proposed PMN exemption rules will be
ready soon.
Staff updated the portion of CMA's submission to the Vice
President's Task Force on Regulatory Relief dealing with TSCArelated Issues.
The update detailed the progress EPA has made
In addressing the key Issues highlighted In the original
report.
CRAC held a two-day planning meeting on October 21-22 to
discuss how the current objective and key strategies of each
task group are helping to achieve the overall goals of CMA and
to promote effective regulations under TSCA.
CRAC plans to hold an Information Meeting for CMA members
on December 3.
Dr. John Todhunter (EPA) Is the Invited guest
speaker; he will speak on the Agency's plans for Implementing
TSCA.
Testing
Comments are being prepared on EPA test rules proposed
June 5, and on OECD proposed test guidelines.
The task group
Is also working on a strategy for getting closure on Section 4
Test Standards and related issues.
Reporting
Plans are being made to develop a strategy for Implement­
ing Section 8 of TSCA In a more Integrated manner.
The task
group looks forward to Interacting with EPA In this effort.
CSIN
The major effort of the task group Is planning a workshop
for early 1982 on the subject of data quality.
HAZARDS COMMUNICATIONS SPECIAL COMMITTEE
CMA submitted a draft hazards communications proposal to
OSHA on July 13, 1981.
The OSHA Work Group has reviewed CMA's
proposal and has allegedly Incorporated most of Industry's
positions In Its own draft.
As of October 3, the OSHA draft
had not been signed by Secretary Donovan.
A publication date
is, therefore, unknown.
The CMA draft proposal focuses on Material Safety Data
Sheets, worker training and education programs, and workplace
hazards communications.
It is anticipated that these same
CMA 037799
1
5
components will be incorporated into the OSHA rule, but the
final standard will most likely be a more complex proposal than
that developed by CMA.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
Access to Records
OSHA stayed parts of the rule on access to employee
records to consider confidentiality of trade secrets.
CMA
recommended that negotiations with employee representat1ves,
not regulations, should determine the conditions for allowing
access to records with trade secrets.
Moreover, CMA continues
to Intervene In the AFL/CIO legal action to prevent further
broadening of access to employee records.
Hearing Conservation
In comments to OSHA, CMA recommended that stays be con­
tinued on the amendment to the occupational noise standard.
CMA made additional suggestions on remaining parts of the
Standard to permit continued use of hearing conservation
programs which have been so successful In.the chemical
1ndustry.
I
Informing Primary Care Physicians About Occupational
Medicine
CMA co-sponsored a pioneering course In cooperation with
the American Occupational Medical Association, to Inform
primary care physicians and other health professionals about
occupational medicine.
Attendance was good and the
presentations were well received.
Reproductive Hazards
Reproductive hazards In the workplace remain a major
chemial Industry concern.
In Its comments on the Interagency
Regulatory Liaison Group's Risk Assessment Work Plan for
control of reproductive hazards, CMA discussed the complexity
and lack of Information on this subject.
Targeting
CMA endorsed OSHA proposals for targeting Safety Inspec­
tions and made suggestions for Improvement.
These Included the
use of OSHA recordable Injuries and self-reporting of these
data to the Agency.
OSHC will continue to work with the Agency
on this matter.
PUBLIC RISK ANALYSIS SPECIAL COMMITTEE
PRASC developed a proposed- policy for regulatory Impact
analysis for health, safety and envlronmental chemical regu-
I
CMA 037800
1
6
latlons.
The proposed policy addresses all pertinent aspects
of regulatory Impact analysis of which public risk analysis Is
one component.
A CMA position on regulatory Impact analysis Is
Important because of the potential Impact of Executive Order
12291.
On September 29, CMA's Board of Directors approved the
Public Risk Analysis Special Committee's proposed policy on
regulatory Impact analysis.
At the Semiannual Meeting In November, CMA will recommend
to Its Executive Committee and Board of Directors that PRASC
sunset and a new committee be formed.
This new committee, the
Regulatory Impact Special Committee (RISC), will have a charter
and objectives more In line with the CMA policy on regulatory
Impact analysis.
Among Its several tasks, RISC will define and
develop appropriate methodologies for use In regulatory Impact
analysis by CMA.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS
Regulatory Reform
CMA sent out a letter to CMA committee chairmen, vice
chairmen, task group leaders and staff executives requesting
their assistance In providing Vice President Bush with an
Interim progress report on the accomplishments and remaining
tasks of the Administration's regulatory relief program.
Clean Air Act
Comprehensive written testimony is being prepared for sub­
mittal to Congressman Waxman's Subcommittee on Health and the
environment concerning amendment of the Clean Air Act.
The
materials submitted will cover all of CMA's positions on
amending the Clean Air Act.
A.CMA delegation participated In a meeting at EPA-Durham
to discuss the Agency's plans for regulation under Section 112
of the Clean Air Act.
On chemicals yet to be listed, EPA plans
Science Advisory Board review of the listing (several will be
reviewed In early 1982), then several option papers will be
available for the Admlnlstrator to review.
The regulatory
options Include:
regulate under Section 111(d), list
Immediately under Section 112, proceed toward listing and
regulating under Section 112.
EPA seemed willing to consider
changes In the Act Including compressing listing and standard
setting, use of “unreasonable risk" and regulating by source
categories.
Superfund
Members of the Superfund Task Group met with EPA
representat1ves to discuss EPA's new concept on the "how clean
CMA 037801
7
Is clean14 Issue. EPA has suggested that practicable engineer*
Ing solutions be used and they would like to develop a matrix
to be used as a guidance document.
CMA Is developing recom­
mendations which will be submitted to EPA. The meeting repre­
sented significant progress In developing a workable approach
for the "how clean Is clean" Issue.
Members of CMA Environmental. Distribution, and Legal
staff met with representatives of the U.S. Coast Guard to
discuss an IMCO draft Articles for a Convention on Liability
and Compensation In Connection with the Carriage of Noxious and
Hazardous Substances by Sea.
Our review of this draft
Indicates that It appears to be an International Superfund with
all the unacceptable provisions we were able to minimize last
year. We discussed the posltlon(s) to be espoused by the U.S.
Delegation (l.e., the Coast Guard).
Speaking Engagements
Joe Mayhew attended the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Life Sciences Symposium In Gatllnburg, Tennessee on October
5-6. He gave a presentation on "The Effect of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act on Hazardous Waste Treatment and
Disposal Practices In the Chemical Industry."
J. Harvey conducted a media tour In Central Florida
October 26-28, 1981. She concentrated her remarks primarily on
the topic of hazardous wastes.
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS
Ally! Chloride
The Ally! Chloride Program Panel has recently accepted the
draft final report by Dow Chemical of the pharmacokinetic and
metabolic properties of ally! chloride. The panel Is currently
awaiting the completion of a 90-day Inhalation study.
Arsenic
CMA and the National Bureau of Standards are sponsoring an
Arsenic Symposium to be held In Gaithersburg, MD on November
4-5, 1981. The symposium will provide a means whereby Industry
and government agencies may reach an understanding for costeffective regulation of arsenic as a hazardous material through
knowledge of production and use patterns, toxicologic proper­
ties, and the presence of arsenic In the environment.
The Arsenic Program Panel sponsored a literature review of
"he suspected carcinogenic effects of arsenic with Dr. HardlngBarlow.
CMA 037802
8
Butylated Hydroxytoluene (8HT)
The joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives re­
cently extended the temporary average dally Intake (ADI) for
BHT, pending receipt of additional testing data.
Chlorobenzenes
EPA and the chlorobenzenes producers have agreed on a
decision-tree approach to the testing of chlorobenzenes In the
voluntary Industry test program. The Toxicology Research Group
has recommended that Dr. Gary Williams of the American Health
Foundation perform the cell transformation assays and EPA Is In
agreement with this recommendation. Requests for proposals to
conduct a two-generation reproduction study on monochloro­
benzene were sent to five contract laboratories.
Ethylene Dibromide (EDB)
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters urged In a
September 2, 1981. petition that the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) Issue an emergency temporary
standard (ETS) reducing the exposure limit for the fumigant
EDB. The Teamsters' petition claims that "three major studies"
show EDB to be a potent carcinogen at levels far below those
allowed under the present OSHA standard.
OSHA has been asked
to write an ETS. OSHA has no definitive plan of action until
it has obtained more data.
Information from the panel will be
considered. Dr. L. Vernon White of Great Lakes Chemical and
Mr. Roger Mangham of Ethyl Corporation will attend an OSHA
meeting on EDB on October 13 as Industry representatives.
Ethylene Dlchlorlde
The Ethylene Dlchlorlde Program Panel Is endeavoring to
clarify several questions relating to the final report of the
chronic Inhalation study conducted for the panel by Drs.
Maltonl and Spreaflco.
Ethylene Oxide
Membership of the newly formed Ethylene Oxide Industry
Council Includes 28 companies and associations. The Scientific
and Regulatory Committees have formed several task forces that
are In the process of developing programs.
Budgets and
proposals are to be submitted to the EOIC Executive Committee
by November 1.
On September 28, OSHA denied a petition of the the Public
Citizen Health Research Group and the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees to Issue an emergency
temporary standard. Also OSHA stated that an advance notice of
proposed rulemaking (ANPR) woul-d be Issued.
Included In the
CMA 037803
9
denial was a statement that regulation of sterllant and
pesticide end users of ethylene oxide would be under EPA's
jurisdiction.
It was expected that the Health Research Group would file
a motion for injunctive relief In the DC District Court;
however, this has not occurred.
On October 1, the Group did
file a discovery request with OSHA for documents used as a
basis for the denial.
FIuorocarbons
All 19 participating companies have committed to the In*
creased budget of $1.9 million for calendar year 1982.
There
Is no Indication that the Industry contribution to the resolu­
tion of tffe validity of the Ozone Depletion Theory will
diminish In the near future.
Four CMA representatives attended the UNEP Coordinating
Committee on the Ozone Layer at Copenhagen, Denmark, on October
Two task forces and the Fluorocarbon Program Panel (FPP*)
met In Rome, Italy the week of October 19, 1981.
A number of
visiting scientists participated in presentations and panel
discussions on atmospheric measurements techniques and results
and the status of atmospheric modeling.
J
Due to budget difficulties, NASA cannot commit, at this
time, to fund one-half the atmospheric lifetime experiment
(ALE) for the next year (total cost approximately $400,000).
Therefore, FPP will reallocate authorized funds to support the
whole program for the six months starting 11/1/81. -It Is
essential that the five ALE stations continue measurements
after existing contracts expire 10/31/81.
CMA will testify on the state of the science before the
House Subcommittee on Health and the Environment In early
November.
Glycol Ethers
The panel Is considering developing exposure data and has
begun a liaison program with NPCA and CSMA. The panel Is also
considering what role. If any, they wish to play In an advocacy
program with EPA and/or OSHA.
Current advocacy activities
involve Interactions with NIOSH, ACGIH, and ECETOC.
ketones
The panel Is undertaking an advocacy program on four
ketones on the ITC list:
MEk, MIBk, MO and isophorone.
The
program Involves developing use and exposure information, as
well as a voluntary test program.
CMA 037804
i
10
A 90-day Inhalation study on methyl Isobutyl ketone (MI8K)
Is currently underway and reproduction and teratology studies
are under consideration. The panel will follow closely comple­
mentary testing on methyl ethyl ketone by CUT, and methyl
Isoamyl ketone by Eastman Kodak. The panel met once with EPA
on testing recommendations for ketones under Section 4(a) and
Is developing a document for submission to the Agency.
The
document will present summaries of toxicity data on the four
ketones and use and exposure Information.
An overview of the
research program will also be Included.
Phosgene
Initial AECM (Albert Einstein College of Medicine) expo­
sure work will begin In early November.
Three Industrial
safety surveys and all the allied material pertinent were
approved by the Engineering and Safety Task Group and the panel
on October 14 and IS, respectively.
Phthalate Esters
The Phthalate Esters Program Panel has discussed with the
Test Rules Development Branch (TRDB) of EPA the voluntary test
program to address potential health and environmental effects
of a class of compounds.
TROB Is currently proceeding with
Agency review of the program.
Dr. Hernandez, Deputy Administrator of EPA,
the matter of DEHP at this time.
Is reviewing
The panel's voluntary test program for DEHA, which Is
aimed at determining the cause of the bioassay results, will be
presented to FDA.
The panel hopes that FDA will accept the
program In lieu of an Interim regulation or ban on DEHA.
FDA and CMA scientists are exchanging views on the devel­
opment of regulatory actions to assure public safety and the
continued use of an "Irreplaceable" substance In food contact
applIcatlons.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB)
The PCB Program Panel Is preparing Its comments on several
ANPRs relating to final regulations on PCBs. Two surveys were
Initiated to characterize the nature and scope of chloroblphenyls which are Incidentally generated by the chemical Indus­
try to Identify the number of pieces of electrical equipment
which contain PCBs, the volume of PCBs and their concentration
ranges. Data form these surveys are In the analysis stage and
will be included In the panel's submission to EPA.
An analytical narrative dissertation describing the prob­
lems and costs associated with low-level PCB analysis was
submitted to EPA on August 25, 1981.
CMA 037805
I
11
An analytical round-robin testing program was Initiated
including laboratories from member companies and EPA.
Its
purpose Is to examine Invariability of results expected from
various laboratories.
Rubber Additives
The CMA Rubber Additives Panel Is reviewing the final
report from Litton Blonetlcs.
The study evaluated the genotoxlc properties of three commercial samples of the rubber
accelerator 2-(Morphol1nothlo) benzothlazol esul fenamlde (MBS).
The Panel will chemically analyze commercial mixtures of MBS to
evaluate the stability of the compound. The panel is currently
Investigating Initiating several other testing programs on
mercapto-benzothlazole properties of three commercial samples
of the rubber accelerator 2-(Morphol1nothlo) benzoth1azolesul fenamlde (MBS). The panel will chemically analyze commercial
mixtures of MBS to evaluate the stability of the compound. The
panel Is currently Investigating Initiating several other test­
ing programs on mercapto-benzothlazole (MBT), nltrosomorphlllne, and additional testing of MBS.
Zinc Dialkyl Dlthlophosphates (ZDOP)
ZDDPs manufactured by Ethyl were subject to a battery of
in vitro tests. Positive results In some of the assays were
obtained and Ethyl submitted the Information to EPA as an ad­
dendum to a previous TSCA Section 8(e) report on possible
reproductive effects associated with these chemicals.
Further
mutagenicity/carcinogenicity research on ZDDPs Is under con­
sideration by the Panel. Phase II of the program will examine
species differences with respect to skin absorption of ZDDPs
and the use of the rabbit as a model for testicular effects.
CMA
i
CMA 037806
EXHIBIT J
REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
WILLIAM M. STOVER
TAXATION;
THE PRESIDENT AND THE FEDERAL BUDGET
When President Reagan made his public appeal last month on new
proposals to reach his overall budget goals, he rejected delays in
any of the recently enacted individual tax reductions. Instead,
the President proposed to enact new measures to eliminate "abuses
and obsolete incentives in the tax code." These include proposals
to restrict or to repeal the use of tax exempt industrial revenue
bonds, to accelerate the quarterly payment of corporate income
taxes, to repeal business and individual energy tax credits, and to
liminate the practice of allowing certain contractors to defer income
tax payments until the last year of a multi-year contract.
In
addition, the President re-emphasized the need to enact legislation
for additional user fees on boats, barges, and private airplanes.
As anticipated, the proposed sources of new tax resources cited
by the Administration met strong opposition on Capitol Hill. Early
warning signals from Senate Finance Committee Chairman Bob Dole
(R-Kansas) indicated that at present a majority of the Senate would
prefer to postpone the effective date of the Reagan individual tax
custs from July to October, both in 1982 and in 1983, rather than
to adopt new taxes so near an election year. On the other hand, the
House Democratic leadership for the moment appears willing to allow
pressure from the economy to build before directly confronting the
President's program.
For the moment the President's options appear to be limited in
addressing key factors that are largely beyond his control;
interest
rates, revenue flows to the Treasury, and inflation. At this writing,
the possibility of a major slowdown in economic activity appears to
have cooled investor demands for higher interest rates, at least for
the moment.
ENERGY;
NATURAL GAS
It is currently expected that when a formal Administration
position on natural gas deregulation is announced, it will include
a recommendation for accelerated phased decontrol of all natural
gas over a three year period. The present belief is that an
announcement will not be made until budget and economic policy issues
have been considered by the Congress. General principles or guide­
lines for legislation, however, may be provided to the Congress in
order to promote a hearing process this year. Congressional con­
sideration will also be influenced by the nearing of the 1982 elections.
CMA 037813
2
Oversight hearings on wellhead prices for natural gas have
been scheduled by the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee
for November 5 and 6. The hearings are expected to focus on
problems involved in implementing the Natural Gas Policy Act (NGPA)
specifically Title I. Undoubtedly discussion will also include the
broader natural gas issues, and CMA has requested an opportunity
to appear. No House hearings are expected in the near future, but
support continues to grow for the major elements of H.R. 4350,
offered by Representative Phil Gramm (D-TX-6).
The CMA position and supporting information continues to be
provided to key Administration officials and Congressional members.
The Government Relations Committee (GRC) Energy Task Group is also
preparing to offer a natural gas issues briefing to member company
Washington representatives, possibly in November. A natural gas
"white paper" that discusses the issues and chemical industry
viewpoints is being developed.
ENERGY;
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
On September 30, the Senate Energy and Natural Resourc s
Committee completed markup of legislation designed to deal with a
major petroleum shortfall. Several amendments to S.1503, the bill
introduced by Chairman James A. McClure (R-ID), were included in
the final version. The Standby Petroleum Allocation Act of 1981
(SPAA) would provide the President with broad discretionary authorii
and offer a list of options in the event of a severe petroleum
supply shortage. In many respects the reported bill is similar to
the expired Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act (EPAA). The same
priority provisions of the EPAA were added, including a provision
for petrochemicals. The bill is ready for Senate floor action and
activity could occur in late October.
Markup has been delayed' in the House Energy and Commerce Sub­
committee on Fossil and Synthetic Fuels, and probably will not be
held until sufficient support exists among Subcommittee members to
report out a bill.
CHowever, Chairman Philip R. Sharp (D-IN-10) die
introduce a bill, H.R. 4700, similar in many respects to the unamem
Senate version. The Standby Authority Petroleum Allocation Act of
1981 differs by not listing specific priority guideline provisions,
but would require adoption of regulations consistent with the
priorities specified in the old EPAA.
The Administration remains opposed to the passage of any
legislation to deal with an energy emergency. CMA, likewise, belie*
that no legislation is necessary and that free market forces can
best allocate resources.
In the event that legislation appears
imminent, the CMA effort will be to assure recognition of a high
priority for feedstocks, as in the Senate bill.
ENVIRONMENT;
CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENTS
The Reagan Administration is beginning to provide some of the
momentum necessary for amendment of the Clean Air Act.
CMA 037814
1
3
In late September, President Reagan reaffirmed "the Adminis­
tration's keen Interest In seeing Congress make much needed
corrections to the Clean Air Act this year", In a letter to Senate
Majority Leader Howard Baker and to House Minority Leader Robert Michel.
The President's letter described the Clean Air Act as "our top
priority in the area of regulatory reform", and changes in the Act
as " ssential to the success of our overall economic recovery
program."
Since then. Vice President Bush has begun selectively con­
tacting members of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee
and the House Energy and Commerce Committee to encourage development
of bipartisan legislation in accordance with the 11 principles
announced by EFA Administrator Anne Gorsuch in early August.
Senator Robert T. Stafford (R-VT.), Chairman of the Senate Committee,
now has staff working to develop consensus and legislative language
for Committee mark-up, possibly late in October. The Committee's
new pace could be a reflection of the fact that Stafford has just
announced he is running for re-election, and thus seeks closer ties
with the Administration.
On October 13, CMA representatives met with the Senate Committee
staff to discuss recently released draft legislative language. Our
representatives emphasized our concern on the Prevention of Significant
Det rioration (PSD) proposals, but we focused primarily on the
Hazardous Air Pollutants porgram proposals (Section 112).
In the House, there has been little movement toward the drafting
of a combined mobile and stationary sources bill by
Chairman John D. Dingell (D-MI-16) and Ranking Minority Leader
James T. Broyhill (R-NC-10). Industry hopes to generate interest in
introduction of the necessary bipartisan, comprehensive legislation
following the hearings in the Subcommittee on Health and the
Environment, which are scheduled through November 9.
CMA testimony on recommended improvements regarding PSD require­
ments of the Clean Air Act will be delivered at hearings of the
Health Subcommittee scheduled for October 28. In addition, a detailed
statement on all CMA recommended revisions will be submitted for
the record.
Our Clean Air Act legislative program continues to include
active participation in a broad business coalition organized to
work for amendments this year. We helped develop the coalition's
consensus document detailing 12 basic areas of necessary change in
the Act to "make it work". We are cooperating in sharing the document
with Congressional members and staff in order to show industry unity
for prompt action.
CMA 037815
4
Further, as part of our objective to generate both public
acceptance and more positive media treatment of the need to amend
the Clean Air Act, a CMA "Action Advisory" was issued on September 2$
to all member companies, urging: contact with Senators and
Representatives; education of local media, local opinion leaders and
groups; and, encouragement of others to help carry the message.
Background materials were provided and supplemental materials are
being sent in later mailings.
ENVIRONMENT:
GROUNDWATER POLICY
Rep. Toby Moffett (D-Conn.) September 10 sent a letter to
EFA Administrator Gorsuch criticizing ERA'S "lack of action" on
groundwater protection. The Moffet letter asked Gorsuch to respond
by September 30 with "all documents and materials relating to
your decision not to issue a national groundwater strategy at this
time." Moffat's main concern is that the Administration will not
continue working on a National Groundwater Policy Guidance Docum nt.
CMA testified last year in support of the development of such a
Groundwater Guidance Document.
i
In the past, Moffett has threatened to introduce federal
legislation to regulate groundwater if a National Policy was not
developed within EPA. Moffet's Subcommittee on Environment, Energy
and Natural Resources of the House Government Operations Committee,
will conduct an oversight hearing October 21, 1981 to discuss with
EPA Administrator Anne Gorsuch the status of the groundwater policy <
and other issues.
ENVIRONMENT:
CLEAN WATER ACT
On September 24 the House Public Works and Transportation
Committee completed work on H.R. 4503 (Roe, D-NJ) to authorize for
one year (FY 1982) $2.4 billion for the sewage treatment construction
grants program.
It was expected that Rep. Jim Oberstar (D-MN) would
offer an amendment that would extend the 1984 date for achieving
Best Available Technology (BAT).
1
The Clean Water Act Task Group of the Government Relations
Committee, expressed the following concerns with the Oberstar
amendment:
The chemical industry needs a comprehensive review
of the Clean Water Act in 1982.
These needs go far beyond a simple extension of
BAT requirements.
While we support an extension of the 1984 BAT date,
we have a deep concern that the inclusion of such
an amendment now will preclude a comprehensive re­
view of Titles 3 and 4 next year.
Thus, unless we can be assur d that the passage of
this amendment now would not preclude a full review
of the bill next y ar, we would prefer that non­
construction grant provisions be considered earlv
next year.
j
1234
CMA 037816
5
r
an
d
The Task Group contacted key members of the Public Works
and Transportation Committee and expressed these concerns.
Subsequently, Rep. Oberstar did not offer his amendment in Committee,
but the construction grants bill, H.R. 4503, could be brought to
the House floor by the end of October, and Mr. Oberstar is considering
offering his amendment at that time. The Task Group will be expressing
the chemical industry's concerns with the timing of the Oberstar
amendment with key members of the House, and stressing the need for
a comprehensive review of the Clean Water Act in 1982.
On September 23, the Senate Environment and Public Works Committe
completed its work on the construction grants bill, S. 1274. During
the session the Committee voted unanimously to repeal the Industrial
Cost Exclusion provision (the so-called Stafford Amendment). CMA
submitted a letter supporting the repeal of ICE to all members of
the Environment and Public Works Committee.
ENVIRONMENT:
SUPERFUND DEVELOPMENTS
CMA has been granted the right to intervene in the New Jersey
Attorney General's lawsuit on pre-emption against the Federal
Government. Judge Flannery of the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia will now hear the Federal Government's motion
to dismiss the case.
EPA Administrator Anne Gorsuch has recommended to 0MB that the
Army Corps of Engineers be used to assist in the cleanup of
hazardous waste dumpsites under Superfund, Rep. James Florio (D-NJ)
became concerned about the use of the Corps for cleanup and asked
CMA for its views.
In a letter to 0MB's David Stockman dated
September 15, CMA strongly supported the use of private contractors
in the design and construction work required under Superfund. CMA
said the Corps presently does not have the experience*or trained
personnel that will be necessary to conduct the remedial cleanup
program called for in Superfund.
Rep. Florio held an oversight hearing on the Superfund law
July 29, before his Subcommittee on Commerce, Transportation and
Tourism of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. During the
hearing, Florio developed a discussion on joint and several liability
with EPA's Gorsuch and Department of Justice's Carol Dinkins that
appeared to confuse the issues. CMA therefore felt it necessary
to submit for the hearing record a legal memorandum on joint and
several liability. We contend that the failure of Congress to pro­
vide joint and several liability was intentional. The CMA views
were then critized by Senator Robert Stafford (R-VT) in the Congres­
sional Record of September 9.
CMA 037817
6
TAXATION;
SUPERFUND TAXES
CMA has learned that a draft of proposed interpretative
regulations on the application of the excise taxes imposed on
chemicals and petroleum under the Superfund legislation is being
reviewed within the Internal Revenue Service. We anticipate that
the proposed regulations will be moving forward from the IRS to
the Treasury Department within the next few weeks.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE;
EXPORT,OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
President Reagan requested from his Secretaries of State and
Commerce on February 17, 1981 proposals for changes in existing
notification systems for exports of "hazardous” substances. A
large proportion of pesticide exports would be most affected along
with products eventually to be restricted under TSCA. The Reagan
Administration has dropped any plans for control or prohibition of
such exports as provided for in President Carter's executive order
which President Reagan subsequently revoked.
Since February, the Commerce and State Departments have en­
countered disagreements in writing the joint response. The most
serious difference of opinion is through what channels information
is to be passed from the U.S. exporter to the country receiving the
product*.* The most likely choice at this writing appears to be the.
U.S. embassy of the receiving country. Another issue in the joint,
response will be whether recommendations are made to amend appro- t
priate sections of existing FIFRA and TSCA laws. The CMA position)
that TSCA should not be amended for this purpose has been strongly?
emphasized by our spokesmen.
The CMA has worked closely with government officials during
this process of evaluation. Close liaison with -the National
Agricultural Chemicals Association and the Pharmaceutical Manufac­
turers Association has been maintained and a fully coordinated
position maintained.
It is expected that we will be allowed to
comment on the final draft before it is approved by an interagency^
committee.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE;
NORTH AMERICAN TRADE POLICY
The Administration continues to take initiatives toward new
trade arrangements with Mexico and Canada. Tensions with Canada ;
over its National Energy Flan and the Federal Investment Review Act
and with Mexico on a number of issues have served to heighten the '
activity.
The President made a report to Congress on a North American t»
union on July 26. His visits with Mexican President Lopez Portillo
and Canadian Prime Minister Trud au have been only preliminaries but
they have triggered follow-up activities. A joint U. 5./Mexico
CMA 037818
i
7
Commission of top level officials has been formed and met recently.
Evidence grows that Mexico and Canada are seeking duty free access
to the U.S. petrochemical market. The Administration has stated
that it wishes to free up markets and trade flows. It is likely
that petrochemical agreements will eventually be made. U.S.
chemical exports to Canada in 1980 were $2.1 billion and to Mexico,
$1.4 billion. These totalled 17 percent of all U.S. chemical exports.
CMA is maintaining close liaison with a Senate Caucus and a
U.S. Chamber of Commerce group working on this matter. A letter has
been sent to U.S. Trade Representative Brock by Mr. Leo Johnstone,
Phillips Petroleum Company. The letter emphasizes the chemical
industry stake in a trade arrangement, and requests that the industry
b kept informed of developments affecting chemicals in the hope that
th industry will be able to support whatever agreement is made.
Various pieces of legislation in the Congress dealing with
Canadian government policy have been introduced but are not likely
to see significant action soon.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE;
SEMINAR PLANNED
On December 8 and 9, the International Trade Committee will
hold a trade seminar at the Marriott Hotel, 22nd and M Streets,
Washington, D.C. Milt Hunt, Chairman of the ITC, will preside.
Subjects of interest to chemical companies will be covered thoroughly
by highly qualified speakers from the Congress and agencies.
Featured will be an introductory overview by Leo Johnstone, Executive
Vic President - Phillips Petroleum Company. Ambassador Sill Brock
will speak at a dinner December 8.
Brochures with details and a registration form will be widely
distributed on October 23.
SAFETY AND HEALTH;
TSCA REAUTHORIZATION
On September 29 the House approved H.R. 3495, the Energy and
Commerce Committee bill to reauthorize TSCA for two years at a
funding level of $62 million (plus $1.5 million for state programs).
S. 1211, passed by the Senate last May, would reauthorize TSCA for
one year at $59.6 million. A Conference is expected to resolve the
differences shortly.
Following our work with key House members and staff to avoid
counter-productive amendments to TSCA earlier this year, CMA
continues to respond to Congressman Florio's staff in their efforts
to monitor the Reagan Administration's implementation of TSCA generally.
Mr. Florio still plans to call for an Office of Technology Assessment
CMA 037819
8
study of the adequacy of the PMN test data, although the letter
formally requesting OTA to begin work has not been sent.
In the
meantime, CMA is working with EPA to produce a viable PMN exemption:
policy for new, low risk chemicals under section 12(b) of TSCA,
as well as the negotiations between the U.S. and OECD, regarding
a decision on minimum premarket data, and the interpretive not
language to remedy chemical industry concerns.
SAFETY AND HEALTH:
OSHA REFORM
On September 23 Senator Paula Hawkins' (R-Fla.) Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee began long awaited hearings on OSHA
oversight, focused broadly on the Agency's administration of the Act
and recommendations for the future. Thorne Auchter was commended
for his efforts to re-direct the Agency away from its previous
adversarial approach. Senator Kennedy, as expected, was critical oi
what he perceived to be an "emasculation" of worker protections
under the Act. He tried to embarrass Mr. Auchter for media effect,
but on the whole, Auchtdr stood up well to the questioning and made
an effective presentation.
The Reagan Administration will not be moving toward legislative
change in this area until other priorities are handled and there
has been an opportunity to determine which administrative reforms
have demonstrated success. CMA is working closely with the new
leadership at OSHA, and with a broad based industry coalition, for
the purpose of developing recommendations for OSHA reform at the
appropriate time.
SAFETY AND HEALTH;
HAZARDS COMMUNICATIONS/LABELING
On October €, Congressman Gaydos* Health and Safety Subcommittc
continued its hearings on OSHA's withdrawal of its proposed hazards
communications standard, receiving testimony from Master Chemical
Company. Master testified against the original proposed OSHA stands
from a small chemical company standpoint, providing detail as to ho*
disclosure of specific chemical identity could harm its busin ss.
The next hearings have been scheduled for November 3, at which OSHA!
Thorne Auchter will testify on labeling as well as other matters
within the framework of OSHA oversight.
CMA continues to provide follow-up information to the Subcoramit
and to work with Subcommittee members responsive to industry positio
Simultaneously, CMA has sought to assist the new task force at OSHA
in development of a new performance-oriented, cost effective and
reasonable hazards communications standard.
SAFETY AND HEALTH;
HOUSE HEARING ON THE RITTER RISK ANALYSIS BILL
On September 24 the House Sci nee Subcommittee on Res arch and.
Technology, chaired by Doug Walgren (D-Pa.), held a hearing on
CMA 037820
9
Congressman Don Ritter's (R-Pa.) Risk Analysis Research and
Demonstration Act of 1981 (H.R. 3441) . This bill calls for
development of comparative risk analysis methodology in a research
and demonstration program under the direction of the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy. It would authorize
$1.7 million for a two-year government R & D program to improve
risk analysis techniques in regulatory decisionmaking, and a twoyear risk analysis study by regulatory agencies and the National
Science Foundation.
Testifying in favor of the bill were Congressman Jim Martin
(R-NC), Congressman Ritter, Attorney Michael Baram, and Brookings'
Dr. Lester Lave. Dr. James Miller, then Executive Director of the
White House Task Force on Regulatory Relief, testified on behalf of
the Administration. Dr. Miller agreed with the goals and concepts of
the legislation, but could not give it his official support. In
his view, H.R. 3441's goals could be achieved through existing
mechanisms within OMB (i.e., the Task Force on Regulatory Relief)
without additional appropriations.
TRANSPORTATION:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
The differing Senate and House bills that reauthorize and
amend the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act are awaiting floor
action. H.R. 3403 is scheduled for October 14-16 and S. 960 should
be voted on by the end of October. CMA is exploring the possibilities
for an amendment in the Senate providing federal preemption and
uniformity of hazardous materials transportation laws. There is also
a possibility of efforts to add undesirable floor amendments.
TRANSPORTATION:
RAILROAD DEREGULATION
A hearing on rail deregulation has been scheduled by the Senate
Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee for November 10. Th
oversight hearings are expected to address problems involved with
implementation of the Staggers Rail Act that passed in the last
session. CMA is in the process of preparing comments to be submitted
for the record and may present testimony.
TRANSPORTATION:
MARITIME REFORM
Legislative proposals that would revise the regulation of
int rnational liner shipping operations in foreign commerce are
being considered. Hearings were held in late September before the
CMA 037821
10
Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on
Merchant Marine. CMA presented testimony on S. 1593, a bill
offered by Chairman Slade Gorton (R-Wash.) and filed a supplemental
statement for the record in response to questions given the CMA.
witness. Activity has also begun in the House Merchant Marine
and Fisheries Committee. Merchant Marine Subcommittee Chairman
Mario Biaggi (D-NY-10) introduced a bill, H.R. 4374, and scheduled
hearings for October 7, 13, and 19. CMA is preparing to file a
statement for the record.
Both Senate and House versions may proceed to early markup,
even though the Administration position is not expected until the
end of October.
TRANSPORTATION t
USER FEES LEGISLATION
There is increasing interest in legislation dealing with the
inland waterways system and harbors and ports. User fees are a
major component of President Reagan's economic proposals, and
legislation is being introduced to permit authorities to collect us
fees to repay improvement and development costs. Proposals are bei
circulated and hearings could be announced in both the Senate and
House. CMA is working with a coalition of organizations as the
issues and timetables unfold.
REGULATORY REFORM LEGISLATION
CMA is actively seeking passage of omibus regulatory reform
legislation. Cooperating with allied business groups behind the
leadership of the Business Roundtable, CMA has assisted in the
development of S. 1080, the Regulatory Reform Act, introduced by
Senator Paul Laxalt (R-Nev.). The focus has been to secure amend­
ments which would provide that "good science" be considered a prin­
cipal factor in the regulatory reform decision-making process.
S. 1080 has been reported with amendments by both the Senate
Judiciary Committee and the Senate Government Affairs Committee.
The Government Affairs version of this legislation includes one of
CMA's "good science" amendments. CMA is working to assure that a
compromise version will be passed by the Senate in the near, future.
In the House, the Judiciary Subcommittee on Administrative
Law favorably reported H.R. 746 (Danielson-D.-Calif.) to the Full
Committee October 1, 1981.
CMA 037822
1
u
PATENTS:
RESTORATION OF THE PATENT TERM
CMA continues to work actively in support of legislation to
restore to the term of a patent grant the period during which
marketing or use of a patented product is delayed because of the
ne d to secure Federal regulatory approval.
The key bills on this subject are S. 255 (Mathias-R-Md.) and
H.R. 1937 (Kastinmeier-D-Wis.) and they are substantially similar.
Th Senate bill passed in July. The House Judiciary Subcommittee
on Courts, Civil Liberties, and the Administration of Justice began
its hearings on this subject in September and held subsequent hearings
in October.
CMA is working in a business coalition under the leadership of
the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association to secure passage.
PATENTS:
UNIFIED COURT OF APPEALS
On October 14, 1981, the House Judiciary Committee favorably
reported, with amendments, H.R. 4482, a bill to establish a single
court of patent appeals. This bill may be taken up on the House
floor under suspension of the rules within the next few weeks.
The Senate version, (S. 1700, Dole-R-Kans.), will be marked up
by the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday, October 20. The key
issu at that time will be a proposed amendment by Senator Baucus
(D-Mont.) to allow the present Federal Circuit Courts of Appeal to
retain jurisdiction over patent appeals. CMA is working closely in
the coalition of allied business interests in support of s.. 1700,
and in opposition to the Baucus amendment.
STATE AFFAIRS
STATE AFFAIRS SPECIAL COMMITTEE:
INTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS
At its September 17 meeting, the State Affairs Special Committee
was briefed by CMA Technical Department staff on current and emerging
air and surface water issues at the state level. This paralleled a
similar briefing on Federal Superfund implementation made at the
prior meeting.
CMA 037823
12
ISSUE TASK GROUPS
In addition to endorsing the committee charter, subsequently
approved by the Executive Committee and Board at their Septemb r
meeting, the committee addressed its legislative and regulatory
priorities for 1982. This process began with the distribution
of a state issues survey which canvassed all member companies,
CMA staff, and key technical committees. Based upon the results
of the more than 100 responses received, the committee established
issue task groups in the following areas:
e
e
e
e
Hazardous Waste Disposal (Superfund and Siting)
Hazards Communication (Right-to-Know)
Hazardous Materials Transportation
Environmental (Air and Water Quality)
Within its assigned subject area, each issue task group will:
e
e
e
e
e
monitor the introduction and progress of State
legislation and significant regulation;
identify the component elements of the issue;
where appropriate Association policy does not
exist, work with CMA technical and functional
committees to clarify or develop the required
policy;
working through member companies and appropriate
local entities, seeks to coordinate industry
participation in state legislative and regulatory
advocacy programs;
provide support, through the State Affairs Special
Committee, to all CMA committees and program area?
in order to assure a consistent Federal/State policy.
October meetings were held so that issue task groups could
organize, address any remaining 1981 legislative and/or regulatory
proposals, review 1981 activity, establish contact with the corresp<
ing CMA technical staff and technical committee for briefings on
policy, develop procedures and assign responsibilities for informat:
and intelligence gathering, analyze states which are likely to b
active, and discuss advocacy mechanisms and coalitions. Issu task
groups will continue these meetings through the fall to prepare for
the beginning of the 1982 legislative sessions.
FUNCTIONAL TASK GROUPS
The State Affairs Special Committee established two functional
task groups to address the communications requirements of the CMA
state program.
CMA 037824
13
The Electronic Service Task Group will;
e
e
serve as the forum for the periodic screening
and selection of vendors of electronic legis­
lative and regulatory tracking services;
monitor the performance of the contracting
vendors and serve as a liaison between the
chemical industry subscribers and the elec­
tronic services suppliers;
coordinate periodic training and information
sessions for member company personnel on
equipment and system services.
This task group formalizes the efforts of an ad hoc group of chemical
industry companies who contracted with an electronic state bill and
regulatory tracking service for 1981. With these contracts expiring
at the end of December, the task group has been engaged in selecting
an appropriate vendor for 1982. This process is now complete and
contracts are expected to be signed in early November. In addition,
the task group is actively encouraging additional member companies
and allied trade associations to sign up for the state monitoring
services.
The final task group is designed to provide the basis for
coordinated nationwide communications on state legislative and
regulatory matters for the chemical industry. The Network Task
Group wills
e
e
e
by drawing upon the resources of CMA member
companies and Industry Councils, develop a
register of personnel to provide the basis
for both intelligence gathering and advocacy
efforts;
interface with other national and state trade
and business associations to facilitate the
exchange of information and the coordination
of activities;
provide through its personnel register, additional
resources to the issue task groups to enhance
their delivery capabilities;
seek to enhance the effectiveness and influence
of the chemical industry in the various states
by working to strengthen or organize Chemical
Industry Councils or other similar groups as
focal points for local efforts.
CMA 037826
14
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY COUNCIL RELATIONS
The State Affairs Division staff is continuing its efforts to
meet personally with members of the various CIC's. During Septembex
and October, state councils in Michigan, California, New Jersey
and Tennessee were visited.
1981 LEGISLATIVE ACTIVITY WINDING DOWN
The vast majority of state legislatures have adjourned for
the year with only a few of the major industrial states remaining
in regular session. A few states are in special session to considex
particular issues such as reapportionment and taxes. There has beer
some activity this fall in several states on two of our priority
issues.
SUPERFUND.
On September 24, Governor Brown signed into law SB 618 which
culminates a long and difficult debate in California over stat
Superfund. Starting with three widely divergent bills sponsored by
competing interests, the final product (SB 618) reflects significant
success on the part of the chemical industry. Although some of the
provisions of the state act go beyond what industry advocated, the
final version is much more reasonable than the radical proposal
advocated by the Brown administration and its environmental supports
On the whole, industry worked closely and effectively on this issue.
CMA contributed the services of its legal staff to assist in draftin'
language during late June and early July. Also, the California C1C
has recently decided to establish a permanently staffed office.
In New Jersey, discussions are continuing concerning proposed
comprehensive amendments (NJ AB 3411) to the State Spill Fund Act
which pre-dates Federal Superfund. Complicating these discussions
are the lawsuits brought by five New Jersey companies (Exxon, Tennec
BF Goodrich, Monsanto and Union Carbide) in New Jersey, and by the
State of New Jersey against EFA in Washington in which CMA interv net
These suits seek to address the question of whether New Jersey's tax
is preempted by Federal Superfund. It is still possible that the
New Jersey Legislature will take up this subject in lame duck sessior
in November. CMA has worked closely during the past several months
with both the CIC and the litigants group to keep all parties fully
informed.
RIGHT-TO-KNOW
Hearings were held on September 15 in Madison, Wisconsin, on
AB 615 which is sponsored by Assemblywoman Muntz.
Industry is workii
to insure that its most damaging provisions are not passed.
CMA 037826
15
On the municipal level, Cincinnati, Ohio scheduled hearings
in October on an ordinance that is potentially very unfavorable
to industry. Santa Monica, California, is also moving on a
similar proposal.
K
CMA 037827
AGENDA
MEETING Of THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Monday and Tuesday, August 30-31, 1982
Silvarado Country Club, Silverado East Room
Napa Valley, California
Call to Order — Chairman Simeral
COMMITTEE CHAIRMEN REPORTS:
Energy Committee
Chairman: James D. Beatty, The Procter t Gamble Company
Distribution Committee
Chairman; D. G. Griffin, PPG Industries, Inc.
Environmental Management Committee
Chairman: Hill D. Carpenter, Monsanto Company
10:17-11:01
Engineering Advisory Committee
Chairman: Robert L. Klausmeier, E. I. du Pont
de Nemours & Company
11:01-11:45
Government Relations Committee
Chairman: Robert E. Hampton, ICI Americas. Inc.
LUNCH (Fairway Deck)
This Board meeting will continue Tuesday
August 31, beginning at 9:00 a.m., in
Silverado East Room.
Next meeting of the Board of Directors:
Palmer House, Chicago, Illinois
CMA 037880
Agenda — Meeting of the CMA Board of Directors (continued)
Call to Ordar and Approval of Minutas — Chairman
Juna 2, 1982 (Regular Maating)
Juna 3, 1982 (Organizational Maating)
Report of Executive Committaa — Chairman Fernandez
Treasurer's Raport — G. C. Harrman
1
Aasociation Activitia*:
TAB
Raport of tha Fraaidant — R. A. Roland
Raport on BPA Mattara
Changas in Task Group* undar CRAC, EMC and OSHC
iii. EEC Confidantiality of Zdantity of Substances
Proposed Program on Mathylanadianilina (MDA)
T.v. Ad Program Raconnandation
2
3
4
International Trade — Lao Johnstone#
Phillips Petroleum Company
5
10:05-10:20
Raport of Technical Director — G. V. Cox
6
10:20-10:35
Report of General Counsel — D. F. Zoll
7
10:35-10:50
Raport of Director of Government Relations —
8
10:50-11:05
Raport of Director of Conmunications —
9
11:05-11:15
Naw Businass
11:15
Adjoummant
CMA 037881
2191
MINUTES of the two-hundred eighty-ninth meeting of the Board of Directors of
the Chemical Manufacturers Association, Inc., held at Silverado Country Club,
Napa Valley, California, on Monday at 8:00 a.m. and Tuesday at 9:00 a.m.,
August 30*and 31, 1982.
Dir ctors:
William G. Simeral, Chairman
Edwin C. Holmer, Vice Chairman
Dexter F. Baker
Raymond F. Bentelle
Charles E. Brookes
Harry w. Buchanan
Carlyle G. Caldwell
Lester E. Coleman
Orell T. Collins
Harry Corless
Robert S. Dudley
Louis Fernandez
John T. Files
Alec Flamm
Joseph P. Flannery
Arthur L. Goeschel (1)
Floyd D. Gottwald, Jr.
T. Marshall Hahn, Jr.
Ben C. Hayton
James B. Henderson (1)
Paul F. Hoffman
Ray R. Irani
John S. Ludington
Dwight C. Minton
Roy F. Reid
Robert A. Roland
M. Whitson Sadler
James F. Schorr
Harold A. Sorgenti
Allan J. Tomlinson
Edward A. Von Doersten
William G. West
Louis G. Zachary
Secretary:
Bruce M. Barackman
Gary C. Herman
David F. Zoll
By Invitation
James D. Beatty, The Procter & Gamble Company (1)
Will D. Carpenter, Monsanto Company
Geraldine V. Cox, CMA
Robert E. Hampton, ICI Americas Inc.
Leo H. Johnstone, Phillips Petroleum Company
Robert L. Klausmeier, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
Paul F. Oreffice, The Dow Chemical Company
Victor H. Peterson, CMA
Ernest S. Robson, Jr. (SOCMA), Monsanto Company
James H. Senger, Monsanto Company
William M. Stover, CMA
Richard L. Wilson, CMA
(1) first day only
CMA 037882
2192
Monday. August 30, 1982
The meeting was called to order by Chairman Simeral.
COMMITTEE REPORTS
Executive Summaries are attached in lieu of the
complete committee reports which have been previ­
ously distributed to the Board.
ENERGY COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with Chairman Beatty's report, is
attached as Exhibit A.
ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with Chairman Klausmeier's report,
is attached as Exhibit B.
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with Chairman Hampton's report, is
attached as Exhibit C.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with Chairman Carpenter's report, is
attached as Exhibit D.
DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
The report of the Distribution Committee was cancelled.
received at the October 5, 1982, meeting.
It will be
The Board adjourned until 9:00 a.m., Tuesday, August 31.
Tuesday, August 31, 1982
MINUTES OF JUNE 2, AND 3, 1982, MEETINGS
The minutes of the June 2, and 3, 1982, Board meetings were approved
as distributed.
REPORT OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Chairman Fernanda., reported the following actions taken by the Executive
Committee the preceding day:
CMA 037883
2193
Approved expansion of CMA's state affairs program, including the
addition to staff of two professionals and one support person at
an annualized cost of $123,000. This is to be accomplished within
the current budget reduced by $300,000 and within the presently
authorized 147 personnel level.
e
Approved the recommendation of the Communications Committee that
the T.V. ad program be postponed indefinitely. Dr. Fernandez then
put this decision in perspective by reviewing the history of the
communications program, including ChemCAP, and advising that rec­
ommendations will be received from the Communications Committee
involving a significant reduction in print ad expenditures and a
change in emphasis in the print ad program.
e
Heard a report from Finance Committee Chairman Sella. The loss of
several members will result in a dues shortfall of approximately
$300,000 this fiscal year which would translate to a budget deficit
of about $400,000 when combined with the approval of an expanded
state affairs program. The Executive Committee will receive recom­
mendations to control- and reallocate expenditures to implement the
state affairs program and at the same time avoid the deficit. A
larger budget deficit in fiscal 1983-84 could occur if calendar year
1982 sales, upon which next year's dues are based, are lower than
originally estimated. To anticipate this. Board members will be
contacted in early October for an estimate of 1982 sales. This will
make better planning possible for fiscal 1983-84. The preliminary
budget for fiscal 1983-84 will be prepared on the assumption that
expenses will be reduced to accommodate about one-half of the fore­
casted deficit, the other one-half to be made up from reserves. It
is hoped there will be some increased interest income which would be
helpful. Specific recommendations will be received at the October
meeting of the Executive Committee. In view of the indefinite post­
ponement of the T.V. ad program, and the contemplated reduction of
the print ad program, the ChemCAP special assessment in December will
be reduced to approximately one-half of the originally approved 40
percent level to reflect the actual forecasted communications ex­
penses. It is planned that this will be the last special assessment,
since the June dues billing for fiscal 1983-84 would be adjusted up­
ward accordingly, to reflect the permanent expansion of the public
relations effort, including special issue advertising which would be
at a substantially reduced level from previous ad expenditures. This
billing, which may be looked at as being the sum of the dues plus the
special assessment, would see a decline from 140 percent to approxi­
mately 126 percent of the previous dues base.
e
Heard a report from Membership Committee Chairman Caldwell concerning
membership retention and recruitment. The committee was requested to
continue the development of its proposed plan but defer action until
the economic environment was more propitious.
Chairman Fernandez then solicited help from the Board members m con­
tacting the following companies, who have resigned for financial reasons:
CMA 037884
2194
The Ansul Company; Arsynco, Inc.; Carstab Corporation; Climax
Molybdenum Company; Reynolds Metals Company, Chemical Division;
and Publicker Industries Inc. Volunteers have already been
obtained for Chevron Chemical Company, Glyco Inc., and Sun
Chemical Corporation, Chemicals Group.
TREASURER'S REPORT
Mr. Herman's report is attached as Exhibit E. Additionally, he advised
that the request for an estimate of calendar year 1982 sales will go out the
first week in October. Responses by October 31 would be appreciated.
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES
Report of the President
e
CMA's officers have met with the EPA Administrator, Mrs. Gorsuch
and her key staff to develop a dialogue between EPA and the
chemical industry. Issues discussed have been those of high
priority, e.g., Superfund, siting problems, and clean air. Dis­
cussions of current issues will continue. At the next meeting
these will include protocols for the negotiation of settlements
of waste site situations under Superfund and the inclusion by
EPA of mining sites in Superfund payouts. Again, the Board mem­
bers were requested to be supportive of EPA in public comments
and also to invite EPA personnel to tour chemical plants to en­
hance their understanding of the industry. Meanwhile a program
is planned which will involve visits of designated EPA representa­
tives to selected facilities.
e
Mr. Roland advised of the formation of a Steering Task Group, a
New Chemicals Task Group, and an Existing Chemicals Task Group by
the Chemical Regulations Advisory Comnittee; an Air Regulations
Task Group by the Environmental Management Committee; and a Task
Group on Hazard Communications and a Task Group on State Activities
by the Occupational Safety and Health Committee.
e
Attention was invited to EEC's restrictions on the confidentiality
of identity of substances, Exhibit F.
e
Mr. Roland presented the proposed program on methylenedianiline.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED: To approve the program on methylene­
dianiline (MDA) as described in Exhibit G.
(b) . International Trade
Mr. Johnstone's report, attached as Exhibit H, supplements the
background paper, Exhibit I, previously distributed.
CMA 037885
2195
Report of Technical Director
Or. Cox's report is attached as Exhibit J.
(d) ■ Report of General Counsel
NlfflfKD MATERIAL REDACTED
Report of Oirtctor of Government Relations
Mr. Stover's report is attached as Exhibit L.
Report of Oirector of Communications
Mr. Wilson's report is attached as Exhibit M.
Bruce M. Barackman
Vice President-Secretary
4
Certified correct:
William G. Simeral
Chairman of the Board
CMA 03788$
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
of the
ENERGY COMMITTEE REPORT
TO THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
August 30, 1982
EXHIBIT A
Tbs Cma Energy Committee focused Its efforts on developing
support for legislative notion in FT 81/82. This activity
will'continue to require close attention since legislation on
complex issues is rarely coapleted during one session of
Congress. Progress on energy Issues was, however, unusually
ponderous this year because the budget and other economic
Issues were given higher priority. The Reagan Administration
initiated a policy of greater reliance on market forces to
determine fuel choices and to some extent, energy prlees and
supplies. The Energy Committee also initiated some positive
steps toward energy regulatory reform.
CMA Energy Committee attention is concentrated on the
following selected Issues:
Hatural Cas Issues
Legislation to deregulate natural gas was Introduced and CMA
remains active In congressional hearings on this priority
issue. CMA advocates total phased deregulation of all natural
gas wellhead celling prlees by a certain date and the
coordinated removal of gas market restrictions such as
incremental pricing, fuel Dee Act prohihltlona and limited
access to gas supplies.
CMA was identified as a key player in the natural gas debste
when it sponsored a major study that compared and evaluated 10
studies on natural gas deregulation. The analysis prepared by
Foster Associates indicated that the more comprehensive
studies agree with CMA’s view that substantial economic
benefits to the nation would result from phased total
deregulation of natural gas.
Strong CMA communication efforts
publicized the results of the study through a press
conference. Capital Hill briefings for congressional staff and
support of lobbying activities.
The total FT 81/82 budget for Energy Committee research and
consulting projects was $40,000. Actual expenditures totaled
$43,314 and are detailed in Section XII. The research and
consulting budget for FT 82/83 is $30,000.
The total FT 81/82 budget for outside legal counsel was
$38,500. Actual expenditures totaled $1,500. The budget for
Emergency Preparedness
Unnecessary legislation for standby petroleum price and
allocation controls was defeated. CMA advocates maximum
reliance n market forces in the event of a petroleum supply
disruption.
CMA 037887
2
Energy Tii«»
CMA auccaaafully opposed «a oil Import fee and new energy
taxea;
In our view, any tax or faa would randar cha U.S.
industry uncompetitive lataraacloaally aad dlaeore latarfual
competition•
Fual Poo and Cogaaaratloa
CMA aueeeeefully aupporcad tha OaparCaaae of Energy afforca to
alapllfy aad radaca tha burdaa of rafulacloaa by removal of
uajuatlfled obataelaa for patleloaara aaeklag azaapeloaa from
fual Oaa Act prohlbltloaa.
Energy eoaaarvatloa
CMA foraatallad uaaaeaaaary aad eouatarproduetlTa energy
eoaaarvatloa ataadarda 'for exlatlag laduatrlal bulldlaga
propoaad by tha American Soelaty of Saatlag. Kafrlgaratlag aad
Alr~Condltloalag Eaglneera (ASBIAS).
CMA malatalna a formal proeedura for maabar eompaalaa to
raport to DOE oa aaargy eoaaarvatloa prograaa. CMA mambera,
oa the average, laeraaaad aaargy productivity by 24.2X la 1981
compared to 1972. CMA vaa the flrat trade aaaoelatloa to
aatabllah aa aaargy eoaaarvatloa goal (30Z) for 1985. Thla
vaa aa Importaat factor la convincing DOE to recommend chat
laduatry aatabllah targata voluntarily.
CMA 037888
3
emiMAttT OF MEMBER PARTICIPATION
Member involvement. in the regular Energy Committee buaineaa
meeting*, Opan Energy laauea Briefing* and th« DOE CS-189
Energy Conaervation Reporting Prograa vaa aa follow*:
Coaaitte*,
Tank Group and Work Group aaetlnga
1,576 workday*
Workday participation by iaauaa:
Energy Committee (all iaauaa)
24Z
Ga* end Utility Regulation*
37
Emergency Planning and Tax**
25
Data Reporting
ll
Fuel Uae Act Implementation
3
100Z
Open Energy Iaauaa Briefing* (3Meeting*)
Energy Conaervation
TOTAL
Reporting
162
3,923
5,661 Workday*
At 230 working day* per year,membercommitment
equivalent to 24.6 year*.
waa
CMA
CMA 037889
r
Exhibit A
Supplement
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
by James D. Beatty
Chairman, Energy committee
August 30, 1982
Good morning. My Energy Committee report is a bit like a good news, bad news
story. The good news has already happened in the year just completed; the bad
news is waiting to happen in 1983. And it may if we relax our efforts during
the current year.
Last year I optimistically titled ay report "New Horizons", anticipating that
we had reached a major turning point in federal energy policy. That ve could
correct the excesses of the past and in particular the overregulation of the
Carter years and the five part National Energy Act of 1978. That we could
move from supply regulation and demand restriction to supply stimulation
through free market pricing, knowing that further gains in energy conservation
and fuel switching and most Importantly market stability and predictability
would follow. That optimism was based on the election of Ronald Raagan with
his free market energy platform. It is useful to review two parts of the
energy plank of the 1980 Bepublican platform.
"In order to increase domestic production of energy, Republicans
[we] advocate the decontrol of the price at the wellhead of oil and
gas....We also believe that market restrictions on the use of
natural gas should be eliminated.
"Republicans [we] understand that a free market based on the
collective priorities and judgments of individual consumers will
efficiently allocate the energy supplies to their most highly valued
users.
The President has delivered on many of his energy pledges. The Energy
Committee likes to think that ve have helped over the past year.
last year we identified two major items for our energy agenda:
Natural gas deregulation, and
Elimination of inequitable federal allocation schemes for the
distribution of crude oil under the Emergency Preparedness Allocation Act.
For Emergency Preparedness, we prepared recommendations and testified before
Congress and lobbied for no bill to replace the expired EPAA. While these
efforts didn't convince Congress that a bill was not necessary, we believe
they did help to reinforce President Reagan's resolve that no bill was
needed. Although Congress passed the Standby Petroleum Allocation Act, the
President vetoed that bill and in a remarkable turnaround the Senate sustained
the veto after passing the SPAA by a vote of 86 to 7.
I also reported significant reductions in the regulatory burden of the Power
Plant and Industrial Fuel Use Act and this year I can again report even
further gains. These regulations were one of those identified for Vice
President Bush's Regulatory Reform Task Force.
CWA 037890
2
In March President Reagan ended any chance of Congressional action on the
deregulation of natural gas when he announced that he would not seek
legislation in 1982. While consumer activists and other opponents of
deregulation hailed the President's announcement as a major victory most
observers, recognized it as a postponement not a solution to the problems of
the Natural Gas Policy Act and the public debate has continued.
The Energy Committee recognized that the debate, particularly as reported by
the press, was not going in our.direction. The exaggerated claims of the
consumer activists and other opponents of decontrol were consistently gaining
headlines while more rational analyses were being ignored. The Energy
Committee commissioned Foster Associates, a nationally recognized natural gas
authority and consultant, to compare and analyze ten recent studies of natural
gas deregulation that varied widely in their findings on the impact of
decontrol. As you would suspect, the conclusions of each study supported the
views of the authors.
Foster found two studies decidedly more comprehensive and realistic
assessments of total phased decontrol. These were by the Department of Energy
and Standard Oil of Indiana.
Conversely, Foster found three studies predicted "exaggerated and
unsupportable field price projections" and hence contributed little to a
constructive analysis of the decontrol issue. In March we held a press
conference to release the Foster study and we followed that with a
Congressional staff briefing. Both events were well attended. Just last
month Representative Dannemeyer from California quoted from our study in the
current hearings before the House Fossil and Synthetic Fuels Subcommittee.
In 1981 our energy conservation resumed its upward progress by climbing to
24.22, 2.1Z better than 1980. This is particularly encouraging in light of
the stagnant economy. Our voluntary goal of 30Z appears well within reach.
It is also of interest to examine how our raw energy consumption has changed
since 1972. This table reflects raw energy usage as reported hy our member
companies. It has not been corrected for production changes. Significant
reductions have been made in fuel oil and natural gas consumption.
Surprisingly coal use is actually down slightly and electricity is up
substantially.
I'm afraid
the answer is Washington. This is the bad news. Last year we had two major
issues, this year we have three:
Natural gas decontrol continues.
Emergency preparedness Is in a state of remission, and
The newcomer is, of course, energy taxes.
CMA 037891
I
1982/83 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
Let's examine our plans and goals for each of Che major issues.
First, natural gas deregulation.
The chemical industry consumes over two
trillion cubic feet of natural gas annually which is more than 10% of the
total United States consumption and about 25% of the U.S. industrial use.
1983 is our last chance for legislation to be enacted to replace the NGPA
before its partial decontrol occurs on January 1, 1985. The Administration
and Congress will be reluctant to address natural gas in 1984, a presidential
election year. Furthermore, our worst case risk is no longer just "no
action"; it is an extended NGFA. Our basic position on deregulation is that
che NGPA be amended to provide for:
Smooch and predictable phase up of all natural gas wellhead ceiling
prices to market clearing levels.
Free market access for all consumers, pipelines, and distributors to all
types of natural gas supplies.
A coordinated removal of supply and demand restraints Including the
repeal of the industrial sections of the Fuel Use Act and incremental
pricing.
In order to make significant progress over the coming months in the
deregulation debate, we must address in detail four areas of controversy.
First—the timing of "old" gas decontrol. The interstate pipelines,
distribution companies, and some predominantly interstate consumers are
reluctant to give up natural gas access and bidding advantages that they have
under the NGFA. Many are willing to decontrol old gas, but not simultaneously
with new gas.
Second—is the problem of producer/pipeline contracts. The interstate
pipelines are quite concerned about Imprudent contracts that they have signed,
particularly after the NGPA was enacted, that contain price escalator
clauses. In theory these clauses, upon decontrol, would Increase the price of
gas paid by these pipelines beyond market clearing levels. The pipelines want
legislated protection to prevent this possibility.
Third—is a windfall profits tax. Such a tax is a distinct political
possibility as a compromise to consumer activist interests and as a source of
added federal revenue which may be particularly enticing to a Congress facing
continued hugh budget deficits. We are concerned that full decontrol with an
excessive windfall profits tax could well be worse than the NGPA.
CMA 037892
Fourth--l« th« severity of price fly up upon deregulation. Most people's
views on total decontrol of natural gas are directly related to their
perception of the magnitude of the price increase that will result. The
consumer activists have effectively convinced the public that decontrol will
devastate.their personal budgets. The press continues to provide front page
coverage to these claims while more moderate projections by more knowledgeable
parties are deemed not newsworthy.
Most important of all, in our effort to obtain deregulation of natural gas, is
strong support by President Reagan. We will urge the Administration to
introduce a deregulation bill early in 1983 or to endorse a bill introduced by
a proponent of decontrol. Our committee's action plan includes:
Analyze the national supply/demand outlook for the nation and the
chemical industry beyond 1985.
Continue to present the CMA position before Congress and the
Administration.
Develop and distribute news releases and communications packages.
Form coalitions to develop reasonable compromises on the major issues.
The importance of the coismunlcations effort cannot be underestimated. Let me
cite a few examples of the headline grabbing claims of our opposition:
Frank McKee-United Steelworkers of America
"Natural gas decontrol would more than double current utility bills
for consumers and destroy an estimated three million Jobs in an
already staggering economy. Millions of Americans would have to
choose between eating and freezing."
The AFL-C10 Executive Council has called gas decontrol "the most
expensive short term Income transfer program in the history of the
nation—one that takes from consumers and gives to the energy
companies."
Dr. Mark Cooper of the Consumer Energy Council of America, "As
deregulation drives up fuel prices and inflation, dominos will fall
throughout the economy: output will decrease; unemployment will
increase; productivity will decline; gas supplies will decrease; and
equity will be undermined." The Council estimates that over the
next three years deregulation would cost American workers 300,000 to
450,000 jobs and $70 billion in lost wages while raising living
costs sharply and cutting up to $22 billion from the Gross National
Product.
Armed with figures like these and with inflated estimates that total
decontrol could raise the average household heating cost from $500
to $1,000 per heating season, many citizen action organizations have
mounted effective grass roots campaigns to fight decontrol. In
Milwaukee, 450 senior citizens confronted Senator Kasten then
undecided on the issue to sign a pledge against dec ntr 1. Chanting
"yes or no, yes or no", the demonstrators demanded that Kasten
declare his position on accelerated decontrol publicly. When Kasten
declared his opposition to decontrol, the demonstrators presented
him with a written pledge; Kasten signed the pledge.
CMA 037893
-5jusc a few weeks ago Che Comnictee for Economic Development and the
Conservation Foundation testified for Immediate deregulation before the House
Fossil and Synthetic Fuels Subcommittee. They also recognized the burden this
would be on the poor and recommended that $3--7 billion be allocated for their
needs. The Consumer Federation of America immediately labeled CED's proposal
aS "utter'cynicism".
While we do not anticipate that emergency planning will be a high profile
issue during 1983, we must be prepared for that possibility. The impact of
adverse action could be substantial. In the past the chemical industry has
not received equitable treatment under crude oil and petroleum product
allocation controls, particularly for feedstock. The chemical industry uses
about 5.7X of the nation's liquid petroleum for feedstocks and an additional
Despite the Presidential veto of the SPAA, Congressional
interest in legislation continues. It's difficult to feel secure about the
Middle East.
President Reagan recently signed into law legislation requiring that the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve fill rate be maintained at 220,000 barrels per day
and preferably at a target rate of 300,000. This legislation also requires
that the Administration develop a new distribution plan for the SPR. CMA
continues to support filling the SPR and the utilization of market forces to
properly distribute available supplies during a crude oil disruption.
Our committee action steps include:
Monitor emerging state allocation plans to evaluate the need for
preemptive federal legislation.
Monitor Congressional activity which could lead to SPAA type legislative
proposals in 1983.
Work with the Department of Energy to establish an equitable government
plan for distribution of the SPR oil in an emergency.
Develop background analysis and communications recommendation to achieve
support for the chemical industry's contribution to the national economy.
In June of this year when both the Senate and House were considering an energy
tax as a possible part of the recently passed tax bill, we lobbied against any
energy tax as inflationary, inequitable, and economically damaging through the
increase it would cause to the international balance of trade deficit. In
letters that we sent to Senator Wallop and Representative Sharp we opposed all
energy tax proposals and offered total phased deregulation of natural gas as
an alternate which would increase federal revenues within the existing tax
structure. Many observers rate the possibility of an energy tax high for 1983.
The tax possibilities are shown on this slide. Our analysis of the various
alternate?, which is still in development, ranks them from least impact to
greatest impact for a given federal revenue gain as follows: an increased
excise tax on gasoline, a BTU excise tax, an ad valorum tax, and finally an
imported and domestic crude oil or refinery tax. For perspective, the direct
g°st to the chemical industry of a lOd per gallon gasoline tax increase would
be quite modest at just a few million dollars annually. That tax would raise
$10 B. Conversely, a $3 per barrel fee on imported and domestic crude oil
including imported petroleum products would cost the industry nearly one
billion annually.
CMA 037894
Our committee plan includes: analyze likely tax proposals and develop
information to lobby against them, particularly the more burdensome energy
taxes; analyze the effects of a windfall profits excise tax on natural gas
with total phased deregulation of gas; develop coalitions to continue to
oppose burdensome energy taxes, and; develop feedstock exemption language
should an energy tax become inevitable.
There are secondary Issues that we will also address during this year. While
the Fuel Use Act regulations have been reduced dramatically, they still
exist. We will continue to follow with particular Interest the cogeneration
exemption and related activity in the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and
the litigation in the courts on full avoided cost sale of electric power by
industrial cogenerators to utilities and interconnection with utilities.
Also, we will be evaluating the Administration's proposal to reogranize the
Department of Energy which will be reintroduced in 1983. We will examine the
DOE budget for Industry related portions that could be easily eliminated.in an
effort to support federal budget reductions. As this slide shows, energy R&D
is best accomplished by industry. The caption reads, "We've done it boss!
We've learned to get the gasoline out of gasohol!" Finally, we will continue
to work with the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air
Conditioning Engineers to further improve their proposed standards for heating
and ventilating systems in existing cosmercial and industrial buildings.
ORGANIZATIONAL AND RESOURCE NEEDS
A substantial majority of our resources will be focused on—natural gas
deregulation, energy taxes, and emergency planning.
Last year we requested and received substantially increased support from the
legal and communications staffs.
A major effort will be required to enact legislation to achieve total phased
deregulation of natural gas. This effort will require: an additional
increase in communication staff support, approximately $60,000 for a
consultant study analyzing the natural gas supply/demand situation through
1990 under the NGPA and its impact on the chemical industry (I might note that
our current budget for this year is $30,000), and an increase in government
relations staff support.
In conclusion, we estimate that the Energy Committee accounts for between 2
and 2 1/2Z of the CMA budget. Considering the importance and potential impact
on the industry of these energy Issues, we believe that our cost/benefit ratio
is quite good.
We appreciate and will continue to need high level commitment of member
companies-through your contribution of high level managerial talent.
CMA
CMA 037896
EXHIBIT B
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
of the
ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE REPORT
TO THE
CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
August 30, 1982
Major Accomplishments
During fiscal
1981-1982*
the committee:
Continued to provide major coat savings to the Industry
through participation in developaent of engineering codes
and standards.
Reviewed and subaltted reeoaaendations on proposals to
aaend approximately 1*600 engineering codes and standards,
and on rslated issues.
e
Surveyed aeaber coapanles on their support of education.
Frlaary purposes were to forestall a future shortage of
qualified engineers and scientists, whleh would eventually
lead to severe probleas for all aeaber coapanles, and to
forestall curtailment of institutional research and its
benefit to industry.
e
conducted a third highly successful forua on Computers for
Process Control.
These foruas provide a unique opportunity
to assess the continued rapid growth in dioital technology.
This growth has a aajor favorable iapaet on the cost of
operating cheaieal plants.
Company People Working on Committee Programs
e
Number - 77 (Including the committee, its task groups, and
CMA rsprssentatives under its purview.)
e
Work Tear Xqulvalency - 6
Cost Savings to Industry
e
Estimate - Over 3100 Billion a year
CMA
CMA 037896
EXHIBIT B
Supplement
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
by Robert L. Klausmeier
Chairman, Engineering Advisory Committee
August 30, 1982
introduction
The Engineering Advisory Committee is concerned with all
engineering aspects of chemical manufacturing. We do collec­
tively what would be difficult to achieve individually. Our
scope includes design, construction, operation and maintenance.
While there are many other engineering organizations,
this CMA Committee is the only one devoted strictly to chemical
industry benefits.
If we don't speak for the chemical industry,
who will?
Most of our effort focuses on developing national codes
and standards which are acceptable to the chemical industry.
Beyond that we sponsor forums on subjects of common interest,
for example computerized process control systems. Recently
we added improved support of education to our objectives.
In last year's report, I talked about our work on piping,
lectrical installations, vessels, pumps, boilers, and relief
systems and the codes and standards governing them. Then I
presented an overview of the private sector standards system;
its organization and critical importance to the chemical
industry.
Today, I will discuss in detail two subjects I mentioned
briefly last year so that you can have a better understanding
of the scope of this committee. Then I will describe our
latest venture.
Engineers can be accused of being detail people. We
are, someone must be. A chemical plant is made up of millions
of details, vessels, pipes, wiring, motors, pumps, valves,
insulation, tubes, welds, nuts and bolts. Each must do
what it is intended to do. And practically all of them are
specified by one or more national standards,
it is a good
thing they are.
If not, every company would have to do for
itself what has been done collectively. Can you afford that?
Early in your careers, most of you were probably equally
concerned with details.
Remember - the details are still
there, and each one must be handled properly. Where we can,
let's do it together.
CMA 037897
Electrical Codes and Standards
In past reports, you have heard about the work of our
Electrical Codes & Standards Task Group to protect our industry's
interest by keeping the National Electrical Code clean. We
have millions of dollars at stake. The code is amended and
reissued on a three year cycle, following very involved pro­
cedures. There are roughly 2500 proposals for change to the
1981 code for reissue in 1984. Of these, response is appro­
priate on perhaps 1500, and intense effort on 150. Unfortunately,
we cannot rest on our laurels. Once we have successfully
defended favorable amendments and resisted those which are
detrimental, the whole process starts again. Many of the sam
issues arise year after year, code after code. It is not
feasible for member companies to face this task individually.
A concerted effort is essential.
As far back as 1959, the code has required on electric
motors:
A remote controller disconnecting means capable of
being locked in the open position, or
A manual switch located within sight of a motor to
disconnect the motor from its source of supply.
A pushbutton and remote magnetic switch would be common
to either.installation.
In other words, lock it out in a
motor control center or disconnect it at the pump in sight
of the operator. Note the underlined word - or.
It has been
propsed before, is proposed, and probably will be proposed
again to change that or to and.
Sounds simple, just one more
switch.
A typical pump installation in a hazardous area consists
of a motor, pump, oil immersed pushbutton - straightforward minimum essential.
Remote from the pump is a motor control center. Push
the button at the pump and a magnetic switch in the control
center opens. Also remote, is a lockable switch separate
from the magnetic switch.
The magnetic switch is rated for the motor size and can
be opened safely under load.
Since these are usually located
in areas having less demanding hazard classifications, they
have less
stringent and less expensive design requirements.
Now consider the same pump installation with a safety
switch for each motor.
If the proposed change were adopted,
this is what would be required: hazard rated switch - price
$800 - installation cost $300 - total $1100 per motor.
CMA 037898
Not only expensive, but potentially unsafe.
If this switch
at the pump is opened under load, it will arc.
If not horse­
power ra’ted, it could explode.
I will leave it up to you to estimate the cost of this
unnecessary complication on each new motor installed. Retro­
active application has not*been proposed, but some zealot may
try it at any time. Retrofit would cost more like $1600 per
motor and a modest size chemical plant will have upward of
1000 such motors.
process Control Systems
Now let's leave the code turnpike, try a different road,
and explore a new area: Computerized Process Control Systems.
It is new, exciting and underdeveloped. Sounds like a
description of parts of the Napa Valley.
But like the Valley,
it has its pitfalls. Fortunately, we have good guides - our
Process Control Task Group.
On May 13 and 14, the T&sk Group conducted its third
Process Computer Users Forum. Half a day was devoted to
Distributed Control Systems. Unique to this session were
presentations by non-company member people, a professor and
a journal editor.
This was followed by discussions of Human/Control System/
Process Interface, Retrofit of Existing Plants, and Integrated
Control Systems.
Integrated Control Systems are those which
. combine distributed regulatory control systems and management
information systems.
We have heard the term Distributed Control Systems for
the last several years.
It you are like me, you had an idea
of what was meant but were a little vague.
In a simplified distributed system, there is something
to be controlled, for instance a valve. A signal is sent.
This indicates the current condition.
It is received by the
controller, where it is analyzed, and, if necessary, corrective
action is taken to open, close or adjust the valve. Early
analog devices were elementary by today's digital standards.
The modern controller is much smarter.
However, it neither sees all nor knows all.
Some jobs
are too complicated for it to handle. A higher capacity
central process computer will monitor many parameters as well
as signals to and from the controllers.
It can make far more
complex calculations considering input from many sources.
CMA 037899
It can tell the controller what action to take and may even
reprogram it to react properly to changed conditions. Equally
important, the main computer can be equipped with a voluminous
and reliable long term memory.
It can store process data; then,
in case of an upset, it can retrieve and analyze the data to
isolate the cause.
In an integrated system, the information
is also available to business computers to process management
information.
Fortunately for us humans, even the central computer
needs to be monitored and occasionally corrected.
So there
are still operators, but they are operating with far more
powerful tools than available before.
The term Distributed is used to describe the distribution
of functions to individual controllers versus control directly
by a central unit.
These systems are no't only cost effective, they look
good too.
The last half day of the forum was devoted to open
discussion and a critique of the previous sessions. Seventyseven people from 33 companies attended. This compares to
78 at the 1980 forum. Evaluation sheets showed overwhelming
support for another forum. Comments were consistently favorable.
We also provided papers for those who couldn't attend.
The Engineering Advisory Committee reviewed this Task
Group's charter and supports another forum planned for May
1984*. This is subject to review and evaluation early next
year. The explosion, a better word is detonation, of control
technology is more than individual companies can handle. Cost
efficiency dictates cooperation.
Aid to Education
what should the industry do about the depletion of
educational faculty and facilities? We don't know, but we
decided it would be wise to determine where we are before
we decide where to go.
We started with a survey through engineering contacts
to find out just how and how much our industry is committing
to support of education. Analysis of returns is underway.
Unfortunately, only 39 companies responded.
However, those
39 indicated contributions of over $48 million, an impressive
number. We think this can be used by the Communications
Committee as an image improver. We believe that distribution
of a summary report of the analysis will encourage increased
support. Though the level of support by individual companies
CMA 037900
V
will be lcePt confidential, foresighted companies can be
recognized as leaders. Laggards should recognize their short­
comings and be motivated to catch up. No company is so small
or so poor that it cannot do its share. We will keep you
informed and make our recommendations later.
rnst Effectiveness
Ours is a low cost operation as far as CMA is concerned.
committee size is just large enough to provide a good
cross section. We have only five Task Groups. They have
specific assignments and hold comparatively few meetings. Our
demands on CMA staff, facilities, and dollars are small. But
we do a job which must be done, either within or outside of
CMA. Separate company programs to do what we do would cost
far more than ours. You are getting a good return on your
investment.
Our
Our work is prophylactic, not postnatal. We prevent
rather than react. Many regulations, particularly OSHA's, are
based on national standards. Under "new federalism", standards
prepared by the private sector will be used in more regulations,
both federal and state. We'd better be damned sure they say
what we want them to say.
It is better for us to speak up,
otherwise the fabricators, regulators, and unions will be free
to look after their own narrow interests.
Standards carry legal connotations beyond mere regulation.
There will be accidents, fires, explosions, and releases no
matter how hard we try to prevent them.
In fact and in court,
we must be certain that we have followed accepted industry
practice. Codes and standards equal good practice. Let's do
the job together. We can't afford to stand alone.
Now here's what you have all been waiting for.
CMA
CMA 037901
I
EXHIBIT C
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT
TO THE
CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
August 30, 1982
Early sections of the 'report of the Government Relations
committee are devoted to its role, membership and organization.
Th committee is the focal point of the coordinated legislative
activities of the chemical industry in Washington.
Through
th cooperative efforts of a highly professional community of
Washington representatives, the Government Relations Committee
is able to provide a service which offers to CMA and its vari­
ous program elements:
monitoring of key issues;
advice during policy making;
legislative strategy development and political
analysis;
direct legislative communications programs.
where the importance of issues have dictated the appointm nt of a Committee Keyman or formation of a task group, the
staff executive/support function is provided by a member of
the professional staff of the CMA Government Relations Depart­
ment.
Special Activities
Section IVof the report describes the CMA Briefing Break­
fast and the CHEMICAL FORUM Luncheon series, both aimed at
promoting interaction between industry Washington representatives,
encouraging participation and keeping them abreast of develop­
ments on current issues. The CHEMICAL FORUM also serves to
enhance the reputation and recognition of CMA in the Nation's
Capital, since it features addresses by respected and widelykn wn public figures.
Last Year's Objectives and Progress
These are detailed in Section v, with much emphasis being
plac d on widening participation and sharpening internal proce­
dures .
I
-1CMA 037902
Issues
Section VI provides a series of reports by Keymen and task
group chairmen on important issues which occupy the attention of
the Government Relations Committee during this year.
These
issues represent the work product on which this committee pro­
vides overall legislative -service and leadership for CMA ad­
vocacy.
Legislative1 Timetable and Priorities
Section VIXis a chart which represents a new approach by
the Government Relations Committee in identification and prior­
itization of key issues. The Committee believes that this pro­
cess should be completed and formalized for all of the CMA pro­
gram.
It will be noted that the Committee believes that constit­
uent communication will be especially appropriate and productive
in the issues of the Clean Air Act. the Clean Water Act, Natural
Gas Deregulation, and Superfund/CERCLA. Similarly, legislative/
communications priorities seem to coincide in the areas of the
Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, Natural Gas Deregulation, the
Occupational Safety and Health Act, and Superfund/CERCLA.
Committee Plans and Objectives
Section VIII explains three areas where "doing better" would
seem likely to produce important dividends for the chemical in­
dustry: linking legislative and communications efforts more
directly, more effective coalitioning, and the focusing of con­
stituent influence.
In the area of communications and public understanding, the
Committee is forming a task group to:
create more interaction between communications
professionals and government relations professionals;
identify priorities;
set timetables,*
develop new "messages";
target communications programs to Congressional
districts.
With regard to coalitions, the Government Relations Committee
plans to discourage creation of new organizations to handle co­
alition efforts on issues, and at the same time, to encourage more
2
CMA 037903
I
r
attention to the coalitioning process in the larger umbrella
business organizations.
In order to promote a sharper focus on constituent commu­
nications with specific key Congressmen, the Government Rela­
tions Committee has begun efforts to:
identify legislative issues which best lend them­
selves to constituent communications;
identify communications issues from a similar
perspective;
survey the constituent contacts capabilities of
member companies;
identify Congressional committees which handle the
most important bills;
develop more detailed home district data on
Congressmen'who serve on key committees;
develop a voting record evaluation of key mem­
bers of Congress.
CMA
CMA 037904
EXHIBIT C
Supplement
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
BY ROBERT E. HAMPTON, CHAIRMAN
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS COMMITTEE
AUGUST 30, 1982
I am pleased to have this opportunity to present the annual GRC report.
X would like to call your attention to the written report, previously dis­
tributed to you, particularly Section V, 1981 - 82 Committee Objectives
and Progress; Section VI, Keymen's Report on the Substantive Issues; and
Section VII, Major Legislative Issues Timetables and Priorities as I will
not cover these matters in my presentation.
Last year we reported on the implications of the political changes
brought about by the election of President Reagan and a Republican Senate
and how these changes might impa.ct on the chemical industry, effect the role
of the GRC and our legislative efforts. We mentioned that the economic
issues, taxes, budget cuts, and Social Security Reform would dominate the
time and attention of both the Administration and Congress and that we did
not expect major environmental or health legislation to pass in 1981. In
addition, we stated that these issues would be put off until 1982, bringing
them into consideration during an election year, thus making it even more
difficult to achieve substantial amendments. We also stated that this did
not mean that efforts should not be made to amend key legislation, but we
had to be realistic about our chances for success. We pointed out that
significant legislation might be set aside and no final action taken until
1983.
This now appears to be the case.
We are greatly disappointed that the seemingly favorable political
makeup of the Administration and Congress did not produce results; but
what has happened was not totally unexpected.
However, we are continuing to work for comprehensive changes in a
number of laws, and the organizational objectives we achieved last year
place us in a much stronger position to advocate change than in the past.
By a more systematic focus on strategy and planning, improving communications
and coordination within the CMA structure and continuing efforts to educate
members of Congress and Administration officials with well-reasoned positions
and good backup data, positions on the issues have been changing for the
better.
It is against this background that the GRC critiqued its activities and
developed our objectives for the coming year. The major question we asked
ourselves was how can we do better and what are the things we have to do to
be better.
CMA 037905
We examined the various factors that impact upon the legislative
process and the roles various institutions play in influencing that process:
The media, public understanding of the chemical
industry and media influence on Congress.
Business coalitions in Washington.
CMA, the GRC itself, Washington Representatives
and the industry.
The chemical industry and its political clout.
Chemical industry issues and priorities.
I would like to cover just two of those factors:
First, one of the essential ingredients in setting the scene for
achieving legislative success is* "communications." Why is it when our
industry advocates changes in legislation that the public perceives it
as an attempt to gut a law that protects them and the environment and that
our sole reason for wanting change is cost. Why does this misconception
carry over to the Congress which gives us sympathy and understanding, but
out of fear of public opinion will not vote to support responsible changes
that are well justified on the merits and by good science. The main
reason is the single message persistently carried by the media, influenced
by environmental groups, that industry-advocated changes gut the law, and
that industry wants change only to save money. This oversimplified, easyto-state message, substantiated by a few isolated examples from the past,
but presented as a generalization, has created a total misconception of
the chemical industry.
To accomplish our industry's legislative goals, the GRC feels it is
essential that we take the necessary actions to clear up these miscon­
ceptions by better coordination of our communications program with our
legislative goals.
We will identify those issues of importance, prioritize them, set
goals and timetables, assist in developing communications that are effec­
tive in the legislative arena, and create a new sense of direction and
urgency.
The GRC will take action jointly with the Conmunications Committee
to deal with the issues. We have voted to form a task group on legis­
lative/communications to oversee these activities; and through this group,
target communications-related projects.
The second essential ingredient is what we referred to in our report
as £°£us. The chemical industry has considerable political clout (if you
want to call it that), but we are not sure that this clout is being used
in the most effective way. This is a sensitive area and one we are hes-
CMA 037906
cant to discuss because it could be misinterpreted as interfering with
This is not the case. We are all in the same
boat on these issues even though legislation may impact differently on
individual companies. We are all affected by the passage of legislation
that calls for further regulation of our industry—so we either sink or
swim together. What we will be trying to do is prudently direct and
utilize this clout to accomplish -our legislative objectives.
internal company business.
we plan a number of actions to gather information on just where
the industry stands and the details of these activities are spelled out
in Section VIII of our report. We will need your personal commitment and
support in this effort.
Another sensitive area I would like to mention is CEO involvement in
this process. There are times where certain high-level contacts must be
made within the Administration or with the Congressional Leadership.
some cases this already has been done). It is our opinion that we can
only achieve credibility at that level by representation from the top.
The hired guns can go only so far—then the system calls for bringing in
the big guns on specific issues where an appropriate relationship exists.
This involvement will be requested through the proper CMA channels and
here again we ask you commitment.
we believe the committee plans and objectives for 82 and 83 of im­
proving communications, working in coalitions and focusing on influence
energetically pursued will go a long way toward enhancing our chances of
achieving our legislative goals.
A LOOK AT THE FUTURE
t
As far as the Executive Branch is concerned, we are being listened
to and we have not been faced with a flow of new regulations. Deregulation
has not produced the changes we had hoped for but there has been improvement.
This takes time. The reform movement has lost some momentum as EFA and,
to a lesser degree, OSHA have baen under political attack. This is apparent
in legislation being considered by Congress in that a number of amendments
to various laws are designed to force EPA into taking action or handcuffing
them where they have used their discretion on issues the environmentalists
hold dear.
Action by the Administration in lobbying for changes in environmental
legislation is invisible. The White House is keenly aware that public
opinion holds little sympathy for amendments to environmental, health and
safety laws and is keeping a low profile on the issue.
The bot,tom line is that we cannot expect too much Executive Branch
support on environmental legislation at this time. Also, we should be
alert to the signals that the white House is concerned about its image on
CMA 037907
environmental issues, and in order to neutralize this issue we can expect
some administrative action (regulatory) to show their concern for those
issues.
As far as Congress is concerned, the votes in the House on FIFRA, and
Clean Air in the House and Senate causes great concern. Many months of
work with the congressional committees in hammering out compromises have
easily gone down to defeat on the floor of Congress because of the emotional
and political climate that exists today.
what we are seeing today is a number of battles in a war where the
outcome is still in doubt.
At this stage we do not expect any major environmental legislation to
pass this session of Congress.
(Look at forecast on specific issues in
Section VI) This forecast could change as the politics of the issues are
so complex it is difficult to give a precise reading. However, there will
be little time to deal with these issues between the time Congress returns
September 8 and adjourns the fir'st week in October. We are continuing to
work for comprehensive and constructive changes in the laws being considered
and this pressure is having the effect of extending the debate.
What about 1983 - 1984? We believe most of these issues will be
addressed in 1983. What will be the political situation at that time? The
outcome of the 1982 elections will determine the character of the next
Congress. There are as many opinions on what the character might be as there
are people who make predictions. We aren't qualified to predict but some
experts do not feel the change will be all that significant. Republicans are
predicted to maintain control of the Senate and will not loose a significant
number of seats in the House.
A key factor in 1983 - 1984 impacting on legislation will be the shape
of the economy and the jobs issue. Since 1984 is a Presidential election year,
what takes place in 1983 will determine the issues of the 1984 election, and
what Congress and the Administration believes to be public opinion will bias
consideration of environmental, health and safety legislation. This is one
of the reasons we believe our communications efforts are crucial.
We cannot be sure of the answers to those questions at this time. We
can only be sure that under any set of political circumstances our goals will
not be easy to attain, we are confident that the approach -we have developed
to deal with these issues will serve us well under any circumstances and in
the long haul lead to success.
We will not be disappointed if legislation is not passed during this
Congress because in most cases what is being considered is worse than,
or little better than, what now exists. To say that the situation will
only get worse next year could be interpreted as meaning we do not have
much confidence in our positions and we should not accept that.
CMA
CMA 037908
I
EXHIBIT D
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
of the
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE REPORT
to the
CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
August. 30, 1982
Major Accomplishments
The Environmental Management Committee's (EMC) 1981*1982 year was full, diverand productive. The Committee effectively managed environmental issues
before regulatory agencies, Congress, and federal courts. In addition, a
greater commitment of resources was made to assist in the rapidly expanding
State Affairs program. A summary of the Committee's major accomplishments is
set forth in Chapter X. These accomplishments include the following:
o
After three years of extensive negotiations, CMA, EPA, and other
parties concluded a settlement agreement on 37 of 54 issues raised
as part of litigation challenging the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) implementing regulations. The settlement
agreement is highly favorable to industry and will result in effective
control of our discharges to the nation's waters.
o
Over the last year and a half, CMA sianaged a cooperative study with
EPA to ascertain the removal efficiency of toxic organic pollutants
by existing chemical industry biological treatment facilities. The
consultants report of the study concluded that well designed and
operated biological treatment, in*place, is doing an excellent job in
removing toxic organic pollutants from chemical wastewaters (i.e.,
over 86 percent removal). CMA developed a radio show and TV news
feature about the report and has conducted seven media tours on water.
o
The EMC continued a major resouree*intensive effort, in conjunction
with the Government Relations Committee, to have the Clean Air Aet
amended. Amendments are necessary to obtain relief from bureaucratic
and cost*ineffactive requirements presently in the Act. At this time
it is difficult to predict when and in what form such amendments will
be enacted. The EMC worked with the Communications Committee to pro­
vide spokesmen for clean air media tours in 24 cities.
o
CMA has been extensively involved in discussions with EPA and other
concerned parties over EPA's implementing regulations for Subpart
C of RCRA concerning hazardous wastes. Over the past year, the EMC's
efforts have begun to bear fruit. EPA now recognizes the chemical
industry’s concern that the regulatory system not be a disincentive
to internal reuse and recycling of wastes, and will revise its defini­
tion of solid waste to essentially exclude such wastes from the
hazardous waste system. And, EPA has revised the mixture rule by
redefining which wastewater streams are hazardous, thereby removing
1385 chemical industry surface impoundments from the system.
Industry's approach will result in effective reduction in hazardous
waste and more effective use of by-products in waste streams.
CMA 037909
Research and Consulting
Th« total FY 81/82 budget for EMC research and consulting projects was $587,800.
Actual expenditures totaled $583,857 and are detailed on pages 9 through 13.
The research and consulting budget for FY 82/83 is $300,000.
Program Outlook
Although it might seem that there should be a trend toward decreasing activity
in the environmental arena, this is not the case. EPA staff are slowly
adopting some of the messages espoused by top Agency administrators. Our
continued input to EPA is required to guarantee progress. During this time
that is generally viewed as store cooperative than adversarial, all levels at
the Agency are requesting industry input to their prograsts. A positive
response by industry will require even store stember company and staff resources
than in the past. Our continued regulatory efforts can result in more costeffective regulations for industry that can also result in a substantially
improved environment.
The EMC will be challenged during the next year to respond to the EPA and to
adequately support legislative and judicial issues as they arise. We will
need resources to respond to possible amendments to the Clean Air Act, Clean
Water Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and the Safe Drinking
water Act. There may be litigation related to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act (Superfund) and many familiar
environmental issues will become important at the state level. We will there­
fore be in a continuous process of setting priorities and concentrating our
resources where they will have the greatest likelihood of positive impact on
the industry.
CMA
iii-
CMA 037911
r
EXHIBIT D
Supplem nt
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
by Will D. Carpenter
Chairman, Environmental Management Committee
August 30, 1982
Earlier this year, in a conversation with the Chairman of the Board,
I consented that in the environmental arena, a perfect score is zero, and
« food score is a small negative number. It's probably not that bad, but
vc aust run hard to stay in the same place.
The Environmental Management Committee has several key messages to
bring to the Board, and X appreciate this opportunity to address the
environmental issues that impact the chemical industry.
Last year, t’^yne Jaeschke, the EMC Chairman, made several obser­
vations about the*year ahead to this group. . .the year we have just
completed. His remarks are a useful point of departure.
EMC identified nine issues we felt would require the major part of
our resources. Those issues included, of course, the CAA legislative
report. The water permits program and related water regulation were
second, followed by RCBA and Superfund issues. Ve then listed several
"cross-cutting" issues common to all or several of the above. Regulatory
reform, good science, economic consideration of regulation, and the state
issues were the major cross-cutting issues. In retrospect, the EMC
members and CMA staffers can be pleased with their crystal ball. With
20/20 hindsight, we don't need to change one. The next part of my
presentation is to answer the obvious question:—"If you were so smart
about predicting the issues, what did you do about them?"
First, let me say that the EMC was adequately resourced by the
B ard. We had good support from the member companies, and the staff
delivered for us time and time again. We managed our resources well.
Our outside expenditures were 99% of budget. 70-80% was expended as
planned. The remainder was shifted to more urgent, higher priority
projects that surfaced during the year, as we constantly monitored our
resources to ensure maximum effectiveness.
There were a number of accomplishments that are worthwhile discussing.
Ve selected six that are among the most significant. As one analyzes these
results, we can very nicely use them to give you a better insight into how
EMC does its work, in addition to the type of results obtained.
t
Of the six results reported here, two have to do with water; one
vitb air; and three with solid waste. . .one RCRA and two Superfund.
CMA 037912
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations (NPDES)-(Water Permits)
After three years of extensive negotiations, CMA, EPA, and other
parties have concluded a settlement agreement on 37 of 54 issues raised
as part of litigation challenging the NPDES implementing regulations.
The settlement agreement is highly favorable to industry. The key points
are as follows;
Permit application requirements have been reduced.
There is a substantial increase in flexibility for calculating more
favorable numerical permit limitations which should result in
reduced treatment costs.
Procedures for challenging permit conditions will be more
reasonable. This should reduce the cost and manpower needed to
secure acceptable final permit conditions; and
Dischargers will have increased flexibility in avoiding noncompliance penalties when violations occur as a result of
inadvertent or unknown circumstances.
Fourteen of the reauining issues have been set aside for litigation
later during appropriate permitting cases. As a result, the actual
number of issues to be briefed with the Court of Appeals has been limited
to a reasonable number, thereby achieving our secondary objective of
reducing cost of managing the issue.
CMA/EPA Five-Plant Study
Over the last year and a half, CMA and EPA jointly managed a co­
operative five-plant study to ascertain the removal efficiency of toxic
organic pollutants by existing chemical industry biological treata»nt
facilities. In a recent CMA consultants report on the study, it was
found that current in-plant biological treatment is doing an excellent
job in removing toxic organic pollutants from cheatical waste waters.
Over 86 percent removal of toxics was achieved. The study provides EPA
with the best long-term data on the removal efficiency of biological
treatment for toxic organics and should play a key role in EPA's develop­
ment of effluent guidelines for the organic, plastic, and synthetic
chemical industry. We hope EPA will use this data to conclude that no
additional technology beyond current well-designed and operated biological
treatment is needed to define BAT (best available control technology
economically achievable). Much of our effort this next year will be
devoted to this task.
Clean Air Act Amendments
As you all know, a lot of EMC's effort over the last two and a half
years has been directed at Clean Air Act amendments. With the Government
Relations Committee, we have been pursuing a strategy to obtain relief
fr m current bureaucratic constraints in the act and to obtain more
cost-effective clean air programs.
CMA 037913
Many of the reforms we are seeking have been adopted at one time or
another by the House committee. These include better PSD and non-attainment
program! and streamlined SIP procedures. It is important that we get a bill
through with these improvements. At the same time, there are problems,
principally in the hazardous air pollutants area. The anti-industry coalition
bss demonstrated far greater impact than industry or the administration had
anticipated. It is clear that this part of the Act will be changed whenever
amendments are passed. Ve are working hard now to make sure these changes
include needed improvements whi-le protecting our industry's interests.
RCRA Implementing Regulations
CMA over the past several years has been extensively involved in
discussions with EPA and other concerned parties over EPA's implementing
regulations for Subpart C of RCRA concerning hazardous wastes. Several
of the discussions were, in fact, settlement negotiations of outstanding
judicial challenges to the prior administration's implementing regulations
that were technically incorrect or that imposed inappropriately stringent
requirements that offered no commensurate environmental benefits. Over
the past year, the EMC's efforts have begun to bear some significant fruits.
One example is EPA's recognition of the chemical industry's number one
concern that the present regulatory system inappropriately created a dis­
incentive for the chemical industry to internally reuse and recycle wastes.
EPA is now finalizing a proposed revision of its definition of solid waste
that will rectify this concern by essentially excluding industry internal
reuse and recycling of wastes from the hazardous waste system. A second
example is the agency's revision of the mixture rule by redefining which
wastewater streams.are hazardous. This modification removes 1385 chemical
industry surface impoundments from the hazardous waste system, 945 of which
would probably have needed replacement.
Hazardous Waste Site Management Plan
Pursuant to directions from the Board that the hazardous waste
response center direct its efforts to assistance for member companies in
disposal site cleanup, the task group has managed the preparation and
publication this spring of the definitive work on waste site sunagement
entitled, "A Hazardous Waste Site Management Plan." The document has
been designed to aid in the development of site management plans for
clean up of sites and to assist in mitigating any potential or actual
adverse environmental effects. The site management plan is being used by
member companies and federal and state agencies as a critical management
tool in resolving health and/or environmental problems created by hazardous
wastes in inactive disposal sites.
Superfund Implementation
As you are all well aware, Superfund and its implementation is an
exceedingly high priority issue for the EMC and the chemical industry.
The resource commitment we have made to date in order to obtain a
reasonable implementation of Superfund has definitely been a costeffective decision. In this regard, EPA has just .recently promulgated
CMA 037914
-4the final revisions to the National Contingency Plan. These are con­
sistent vith the positions that CMA has advocated on this natter. The
key points are:
No dt^al standard for cleanup between fund financed versus privately
financed cleanup;
Fund financed cleanups should generally be tied to the priority list
of sites; and
A flexible standard as to how clean a site would have to be under a
Superfund cleanup initiative.
Although several significant issues still remain to be addressed
(i.e., mining site cleanup funding, state Superfund preenption, tort law
and waste end studies), the industry advocacy effort has resulted thus
far in aore reasonable iapleaentation by EPA than first indicated.
After this brief description of six key issues, 1 would like to use
a few slides to give you an insight into the aanageaent of issues by the
EMC. Ve will focus on areas qf impact, resources, and results.
In each slide, the issues are listed on the left. In the first
slide, the area of impact is indicated on the right. The areas listed
are obvious. However, it is of interest that the EMC with CMA staff
moves effectively across these four areas with a large number of issues.
As you can see from the slide, frequently our efforts have impact in
more than one of these four.
In the next slide, the same six issues are listed again to show the
key resources used for each of the six. Of course, CMA staff is involved
in every action, but the comparative effort varies from issue to issue.
In the final two slides, we focus on the bottom line. Justifications
are arbitrarily broken into four listings. Once again, we can win in
more than one way. As an aside, we must improve on expressing our
actions in terms of positive impact on the environment. For instance,
the 5-plant study shows that procedures already in place have reduced
pollutants in water by hundreds of thousands of tons over that expected
by EPA. The industry and the administration are interested in costeffective regulation. . .as well we should, but the public wants to hear
what happens to the environment. Ve must provide that information for
our own interest, and learn to do it routinely. . .in our formal comments
on legislation and regulation, in our casual discussions with the influence
people, as well as our ChemCap program.
Now, let us look ahead. Using the previous format, I will discuss
the legislative area first. In the coming year, we can expect amendments
to RCRA and the CVA, which are already underway. Before the next annual
report, the legislative effort on CESCLA will be underway, vith the CAA
still uncertain.
CMA 037915
With the make-up and mood of Congress presently and in the next
year, we anticipate ve will be swinging upstream. Given the other option
of sinking, however, we shall continue to paddle like hell. With good
technical support and policy guidance through EMC, we expect to reach our
goal of c.ost-effective, environmentally responsible regulations.
The regulatory arena will be active for virtually every major
environmental law, as Wayne Jaeschke reported last year. It was
demonstrated that it takes more effort and resources to participate in a
cooperative regulatory atmosphere than it does to object in the hostile
environment that existed two years ago. Now is our chance to be part of
the solution.
The EMC thinks there are several watchouts during the coming year.
Some are issue*related. . .others are cross-cutting. Let me list some of
those.
Groundwater—It's hard to predict when a groundwater incident will be
used against industry the way PCB's, Love Canal and others did to
catalyze TSCA and Superfund.
A cross-cutting issue is EMC members' impression of disturbing
congressional attitudes on a key subject. The banner of good laws and
regulations based on good science does not have the isipact on Congress
that it once did. Some members of Congress are claiming that this is
merely an excuse to delay implementation of regulations. Although the
Government Relations group is responsible for our congressional arena,
the EMC bases its efforts on the underlying principle of good science.
We must meet this challenge successfully.
In addition to the federal issues, state issues will demand effort
from EMC members, with Superfund and disposal sites being major examples.
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)—Ozone revisited for S02,
Superfund Implementation—will be a continuing area of effort. Some
important issues will be in litigation, including litigation in which CMA
may participate. Many cleanups will be underway and some completed.
Data will need to be compiled for future efforts to sunset the fund.
1) Assistance to state groups on state legislation; 2) tort law.
With a substantially reduced budget, we must select our priorities
carefully, and review our progress and needs to determine how to organize
and direct our efforts. We must improve in our coordination with other
CMA groups. Such techniques as tele-conferences, fewer (only needed)
people at meetings, elimination of some meetings, and better coordination
of meetings will be necessary.
i
Our requests to you as a result of the written report which you have
received and this presentation are:
I
CMA 037916
An understanding of the issues end appreciation of the situations.
An insight into the long-term nature of our work, whether legislative,
regulatory, or what. The effort extends over several years, and the
need.for adequate resources in the bad years is there. When our
resources are limited, we become more vulnerable to poorly conceived
and executed governmental programs. We have to stay active in such
times and carefully set our priorities.
Recognition that environmental issues' activities will continue to
accelerate through 1984.
Perhaps most importantly, we ask for your support in maintaining
member company participation at an effective level. We'll try to
improve their effectiveness. During these tough times, we ask that
you find the ways to make these outstanding people available. 1 can
assure you that you get no better return for your money anywhere.
For cost-effective regulatory management, EMC efforts are good for
you.
CMA
CMA 037917
EXHIBIT E
TREASURER’S REPORT
~nn~ *1fnr-h3 Er-ding August 31. 1982
This report will be prepared and distributed following the end of
the month.
For your reference, the following is provided:
e
The approved budget and funding for the fiscal year beginning
June 1, 1982 and ending Hay 31, 1983.
The approved budget for the separately funded Biomedical and
Environmental Special Program area.
I
i
CMA 037918
r
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
APPROVED BUDGET AND FUNDING FOR THE
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1982 and ending May 31, 1983
REVENUE:
Membership Dues
Investment Revenue
Revenue from or (Dues Support
to) Special Program Areas
Communications Program
Assessment 9 40%
Use of Communication Program Reserves
Meetings (net of expenses)
TOTAL REVENUE
1982-83
Annual Budget
1,050,000
3,746,600
20,600
209,000
$14,809,300
DIRECT PROGRAM ACTIVITIES:
General Counsel
Government Relations
International Trade Activities
State Activities Program
Chemical Industry's Communications Program
Technical Administration
Health, Safety 6 Chemical Regulations
Environmental Activities
Distribution, Energy, Engineering
Chemtrec
Outside Legal Fees
Outside Consulting
TOTAL
971,700
800,700
246.100
251,200
4,963,900
273.600
780,400
737.600
450.100
642,500
1,600,000
795,000
$12,512,800
UNALLOCATED MANAGEMENT AND GENERAL
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES:
Executive Department
Accounting fi Business Services
Printing, Distribution, Computer 6
Information Services
i
513,100
492,200
TOTAL
TOTAL EXPENSES
$14,809,300
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
147
i
V
Note:
The above budget and funding does not include the activities
and 14 staff of the separately funded Biomedical and Environ­
mental Special Programs area.
CMA 037919
l
I
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
APPROVED BUDGET AND FUNDING FOR
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1982 and ending May 31, 1983
1982-83
Annual Budget
REVENUE:
Overhead Reimbursement
Investment Revenue
Publication Sales
TOTAL REVENUE
630,000
225,000
1,000
856,000
408,400
85,800
10,000
1,500
600
1,000
22,000
26,000
80,900
48,100
74,500
EXPENSES:
Salaries fi Related Expense
Employee Benefits
Travel & Staff Training
Dues, Subscriptions fi Publications
Outside Printing £ Graphics
Meetings fi Workshops
Direct Postage, Freight fi Delivery
Direct Supplies fi General Office
Taxes fi Insurance
Rent fi Occupancy
Common Cost Expenses
Administrative Support:
Technical Administration
Accounting
Office of General Counsel
Printing fi Distribution
32,300
27,300
75,000
40,100
TOTAL
933,500
EXCESS REVENUE (EXPENSES)
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
14
j
I
CMA 037920
EXHIBIT F
EEC's Restrictions on Confidentiality
of Identity of Substances
The CMA/SOCMA International Affairs Croup's EEC Compliance Task Group has
invested much effort recently to determine the extent of interest of member
companies and their European affiliates in changing EEC's rules for the
above. These rules comprise explicit denial of such confidentiality in the
EEC inventory of existing substances, and a limit of three years of
confidentiality for non-"dangeroue" new substances notified by manufacturers
or importers to member states. At lAG's request, the Trade Representative's
Office asked EEC formally for resolution of this potential trade barrier.
This interest is intense, but concentrated in only a few sianufacturers of
il-additives, photographic film, and specialty polymers. Some Europeans are
supportive, but think the effort futile, given the EEC's administrative
limits and the potential difficulties in amending the ‘67 Directive, Sixth
Amendment.
SC's formal response to ISO is overdue and may not arrive until early or^
mid-September. If the response proves negative, as hinted informally, IAG
will likely recommend halting this effort and advise the concerned companies
to devise their best individual strategies.
ACTION REQUIRED —
None, for information only.
CMA
CMA 037921
EXHIBIT G
PROPOSED PROGRAM ON METHYLENEDIANILINE
Problem/Background:
On Juna 1, 1979, the Interagency Testing
Committee (ITC) recosnended that 4,4'-Methylene*
dianiline (MDA> be considered for testing for
its toxic effects on human health and the envi­
ronment. The ITC recommended the following
studies: carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, terato­
genicity, other chronic effects, environmental
effects and epidemiology. In a December 31,
1981, filing with the U.S. District Court, EPA
indicated that they expected to make a decision
on ITC's testing recommendation on MDA in calen­
dar year 1982. In response to the recommendation,
MDA manufacturers asked CMA to set up a program
on this chemical. Accordingly, the Special
Programs Division convened an exploratory meeting
where the group wrote a program charter and ten­
tative budget. The proposed charter was reviewed
and received favorable responses by the Special
Programs Advisory Committee (SPAC) and QlA staff.
Objective;
In its June 1982 filing with the Court, EPA re­
moved MDA from its 1982 schedule, but stated its
intention to complete action on this chemical by
mid-1983. The Panel will, therefore, spend the
next two months collecting and analyzing data in
order to recommend a reasonable regulatory re­
sponse to EPA.
Recommendation
That the Executive Committee accept SPAC's recom­
mendation for approval of this program.
i
I
Money
Participating, companies will support program ac­
tivities and necessary overhead charges.
ti
Company Personnel
One representative from each participating company.
CMA Personnel
This program, along with other recently approved
programs, will require the addition of one pro­
fessional and one support staff member to the
Special Programs Division. This will bring the
Division staff authorization to 18. The cost of
the two additional staff members will be recovered
from the per-hour program charges.
Action Required:
Approval of Recommendation.
CMA
CMA 037922
l
EXHIBIT H
REPORT TO THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
ON
INTERNATIONAL TRADE ACTIVITIES
August 31, 1982
Presented by
Leo H. Johnstone
Vice Chairman, "Phillips Petroleum Company
International trade issues continue to be an area of high activity.
As reported before, the current recession has promoted various types of pro­
tectionisms all around the world. The GATT Ministerial meeting to be held in
November will be extremely important for setting the direction of international
trade in the '80's. A prime item on the u. S. agenda for that meeting is to
obtain a recommitment to free trade as well as to complete certain items left
over from the Tokyo Round. In addition, it is planned that the GATT agreements
be expanded into services (such as banking, insurance, engineering, and con­
struction) plus an investment code and expansion and redefinition of the
generalizations system of preferences. Trade relations with Europe are not
at their healthiest state in view of the U.S. sanctions regarding the Soviet
gas pipeline and the counter-vailing duty decision regarding steel imports
into the United States from Europe. On the other hand, the GATT Ministerial
could not come at a more appropriate time from the standpoint of trying to
head off conditions which could escalate into trade retaliation and a re­
enactment of the Smoot-Hawley Bill of the 1930's which magnified and prolonged
the Great Depression. There are just a few items I would like to touch on to­
day which are covered generally in your briefing book, some of which deserve
some expansion.
1. The petrochemical discussions.. There have been no more
developments in regard to further discussions with the EEC. Although
there continues to be some anti-dumping activities, the European
chemical industry appears to be more preoccupied with internal condi­
tions in seeking means of rationalizing the significant over-capacity
that exists. There has been considerable activity regarding prepara­
tions for talks with Mexico, including direct government-to-government,
tn setting the stage, plus two meetings with the Department of Commerce
by the panel of advisors from a number of CMA member companies. The
advisors that your and other CMA companies have made available are in­
deed knowledgeable and experienced and are making significant contribu­
tions. The greatest challenge at this time is to define objectives
and reach a consensus on objectives among the advisors and with the
Department of Commerce. Work is proceeding along these lines and the
International Trade Committee of the CMA is actively pursuing this.
The first meeting with the government of Mexico has been scheduled for
sometime in October. However, I made a trip to Mexico recently and the
task force of the International Trade Committee has considered the
matter and we are recommending to the Department of Commerce that the
CMA 037923
October meeting be deferred until sometime after the first of
December when the new government of Mexico takes office, it is not
felt that meetings prior to that time would be productive. The
present chaotic economic conditions in Mexico are also a factor in
this recommendation.
There have been no meetings held with Japan although we con­
tinue to hear that a meeting will be requested by them. It is also
possible that sometime in the near future we will get a similar re­
quest from Canada.
2. Competitive assessment studies are being conducted by the
International Trade Commission and independently by the Department of
Commerce regarding the U. S. petrochemical industry. The purpose of
these studies is to attempt to assess the impact of actions and policies by other governments on the competitiveness of the U. S. chemical
industry and are significant to us in that they will no doubt form the
basis for the attitude of the U. S. Government regarding our petrochemi­
cal industry in trade negotiations in the future. A number of companies
have been asked for input'into these studies and we will hopefully be
able to see early drafts in order that inaccuracies and misunderstand­
ings are not promulgated.
3. A very significant item which is coming from various direc­
tions including the Industry Policy Advisory Committee, as well as
through other channels, is the dangerous and insidious Vredeling proposal
being considered in the EEC governmental system. While most of you may
be familiar with the Vredeling proposal, I find that some are not, so I
would like to describe it briefly. This proposal would be a directive
regarding workers rights in the community which extends from EC practice
of local information exchange and consultation to the world stage. It
would require annual disclosure of information by management to employee
representatives and prior consultation with labor representatives cover­
ing major corporate worldwide activities and decisions including mergers,
shifts in production, plant closings and even introduction of new tech­
nology into existing plants. This directive is for companies employing
at least 50 employees in EC countries. It would require that each year
the parent 0. S. company would submit information to the management of
its EC subsidiaries which would in turn provide it to the local union
labor representatives covering the parent company's worldwide activities
related to its economic and financial situation, the possible develop­
ment of the business, products and sales. It would include production
and investment programs, manufacturing and working methods, including
new working methods, technological innovations and health and safety.
The subsidiaries would be required to consult with the employee repre­
sentatives at least 30 days prior to any corporate decision which is
likely to have a substantial affect on the employees' interest with a
view to reaching agreement on the measure planned. The company must post­
pone any decision until the union opinion is received or until the 30-day
period has elapsed. In addition, employees at any other subsidiary than
the one directly affected may also demand to.be consulted. The proposed
CMA 037924
I
directive also contains provisions under which the employee representa­
tive is authorized to open consultation with the parent company manage­
ment under a by-pass provision. The employee representative will be
granted appeal rights to tribunal or other national authorities in the
event a management fails to fulfill the provisions of the directive.
This, of course, has numerous drawbacks which include an extra-territorial
reach giving unions the ability to negotiate with multi-national com­
panies on global corporate plans and at the corporate rather than the
individual plant level. It could involve submission of data which may be
in violation of securities law and SEC regulations, access to corporate
confidential or proprietary information and establishing a precedent
guaranteeing worker consultation on an international basis.
This directive is now before the European Parliament for a vote
the week of September 13. The EC Commission are to reconsider and proba­
bly redraft the directive for consideration by the EC Council of Ministers
in mid to late 1983. If adopted, the individual member states would be
required to implement the directive through national legislation.
This directive has become highly political and represents a major
priority for the European Trade Confederation which has effectively lob­
bied for it. Business lobbying on Vredeling in the U. S. is coordinated
through the National Foreigh Trade Council, the U. S. Council for Inter­
national Business, the 0. S. Chamber of Commerce, and the NAM. Initially,
the lobbying took the form that this proposal is so bad that it should
simply be discarded. Present wisdom is that since some form of Vredeling
will be adopted, lobbying should take the form of attempting to revise the
proposal to something that can be lived with. Ivor Richard of Great
Britain is the commission member who will be in charge of the redrafting
and is the guru of the Vredeling proposal, having inherited this role from
Vredeling upon the latter's retirement. Richard has indicated in speeches
and other discussions that he is flexible as to the final form.
At the present time, the CMA position regarding Vredeling is being
formulated and should be forthcoming in the near future. However, in the
meantime I would urge you to become more familiar with this proposal and
its potentially harmful effects.
CMA
CMA 037925
EXHIBIT I
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Petrochemical Discussions
The state of the international petrochemical markets has caused unpre­
cedented government to government discussions about petrochemicals. Three
EEC/U.S. talks were held. The Departtnent of Commerce is preparing for talks
with the Mexican government. One discussion on petrochemicals has occurred
between the U.S. and Japanese governments, with additional talks in prospect.
Competitive Assesmnent Studies
The International Trade Commission is investigating the impact of petro­
chemical production by oil-producing nations on the U.S. petrochemical industry.
Independently, the Department of Commerce is preparing a competitive assess­
ment study of the U.S. petrochemical industry as a special project at the be­
hest of Secretary Baldrige.
Legislation
The growing concerns of the U.S. Congress about trade problems are illus­
trated in Senator Danforth's bill (S. 2094), “The Reciprocal Trade and Invest­
ment Act of 1982." Its provisions may well affect trade, intellectual property
* rights and investment of the U.S. chemical industry.
Vredeling Proposal
It is likely that a directive will be issued in 1983 or 1984
Market that will affect U.S. subsidiaries operating there. It is
Vredeling Proposal and presently contains disclosure requirements
tions of information about matters affecting employees' interests
affording unions consultative rights with management.
Action Required:
None.
by the Common
called the
by corpora­
as well as
For information only.
CMA
CMA 037926
EXHIBIT
J
REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL DIRECTOR
Technical Department presentations:
Council of Pollution Control Financing Agencies
National Conference, Pittsburgh, PA.
Topic:
Trends
in Environmental Regulation.
e
Washington Center for Learning Alternatives Graduate
Business/Government Relations Program, Washington,
Topic:
The Chemical Industry and CMA's Lobbying
Activities.
Allied Corporation, Morristown, NJ, Business Planning
and Pollution Control Meeting.
Topic:
The Environ­
mental Regulatory Future.
Harvard School of public Health, Cambridge, MA.
Topic: CMA Hazardous Waste Program.
Mayhew
Engineering Foundation Conference, Henniker, NH.
Topic:
A Hazardous Waste Site Management Plan.
e
American Petroleum Institute's Annual Conference on
Highway Transportation, Hilton Head, SC.
Topic:
Emergency Response -- and the Petroleum Industry.
e
National Council of State Legislature's Conference,
Chicago, IL.
Topic:
CHEMTREC/Hazardous Materials.
e
Family Lines Rail system, Jacksonville, FL.
Topic:
Relationship Between CHEMTREC and the Railroads.
e
Dr. Stack responded in a telephone interview to
questions on the use of benzene in consumer products
on a radio program originating in Denver, CO.
e
As part of the ongoing Right-to-Know radio series.
Dr. Langley Spurlock taped a show on the role of
research in protecting people from hazardous
chemicals.
'The Technical Director conducted six TV, seven radio,
one magazine, and six newspaper interviews in Washington,
She worked
with the Conservation Foundation Hazardous Waste Dialogue
Group (which she co-chairs) in reviewing the final draft of
the community siting handbook.
one sore editing and the
CMA 037927
2
handbook will be ready for typesetting by early September.
She met with the American Chemical Society's Committee on
Environmental Improvement to review the final draft pamphlet
on acid rain.
She participated in the first steering com­
mittee meeting to organize the AAR/CMA/RPX Joint Inter­
industry Task Force on safe transportation of hazardous
materials, and a CMA press briefing to explain the research
the task force will undertake.
The Technical Director
conducted a two-day retreat at which she and the Division
Directors worked on long-range planning for the Technical
Department.
Other activities included participation in
orientation for the new CMA committee chairmen, and a
National Cancer Institute briefing wiht a coalition of other
trade association technical people.
The Deputy Technical Director had three radio news
broadcasts*
Environmental Program staff conducted media
tours in Denver, Colorado Springs, and Pueblo, CO, and in
Portland and Eugene, OR on hazardous waste issues.
The
CHEMTREC Director conducted media tours in Savannah, GA and
Jacksonville, FL, including five television, two radio and
three newspaper interviews.
CHEMICAL TRANSPORTATION EMERGENCY RESPONSE CENTER (CHEMTREC)
An agreement was signed with Texas ASM University to
conduct seven Emergency Response Team Workshops between
September 1982 and September 1983*
DISTRIBUTION, ENERGY AND ENGINEERING DIVISION
Distribution
e
CMA opposed an Association of American Railroads
(AAR) petition to the interstate Commerce Commission
(ICC) to suspend the tank car compensation adjustment
due September 1.
The increase, due to member company
private car owners/operators, is estimated to be
about $50 million.
The AAR also proposed that the
Commission's proceeding be reopened to revise the
present formula, arrived at through good faith
negotiations in 1979, which provides a fair basis for
compensation payments.
e
Complementing our successful efforts to change the
'Senate version (S. 1593) to amend the Shipping Act of
1916, several CMA views appear to have been adopted
in H.R. 4374, striking a reasonable balance between
carrier and shipp r interests.
While passage is not
assured, it is likely we’ve avoided advers
legisla­
tion.
At the same time, we laid the groundwork for
future legislation favorable to US exporters.
CMA 037928
B
Distribution Committee groups are working coopera­
tively with the CMA/AAR/RPI Task Force to improve
•rail transportation safety.
Preliminary joint
efforts will concentrate on overcoming nonaccident
caused spills and leaks, emergency response and
communications.
e
We ware successful in getting the ICC to re-examine
previously approved rail index procedures.
Rail Cost
Index increases result in automatic freight rate in­
creases.
The ICC now will consider productivity
improvements as recommended by CMA.
Also, CHA deter­
mined that an ICC audit established that the AAR
Price Index, used as the basis for the cost index,
included unsubstantial data.
CMA will file
additional comments.
mnaz
On July 30, CMA testified before the Subcommittee on
Fossil and Synthetic Fuels regarding Natural Gas
Policy.
The CMA position for total phased deregula­
tion of all natural gas and removal of gas market
restrictions was updated to include examples of member company difficulties due largely to the Natural
Gas Policy Act.
e
In a letter to Senator Wallop, chairman of the Senate
Finance Committee's Subcommittee on Energy and Agri­
culture Taxation, CMA opposed any energy tax or fee
that would result in rendering the US industry uncompetitive internationally and would distort interfuel
competition.
An oil import fee would be inflation­
ary, inequitable, and an unworkable administrative
burden.
Also, it would adversely affect the chemical
industry contribution to a favorable balance of
trade.
CMA favors reduction of expenditures and cor­
rective legislative action for existing tax struc­
ture.
New tax proposals do not include new taxes on
energy.
e
CMA submitted comments on rules under the Fuel Use
Act pertaining to prohibition orders for existing
major fuel-burning installations (MFBls) *
We support
these efforts toward regulatory reform, but request
that portions of the regulatory program be retained
'in the event owners of MFBls desire a prohibition
order to prevent provisions of the Clean Air Act from
restricting coal use.
I
I
j
i
l
The CMA Energy Conservation Surrey Report for 1981
was submitted to the Department of Energy*
CMA
members, on the average, have increased energy pro­
ductivity by 24.2% over 1972.
The results will be
CMA 037929
4
publicized by CM A •
An
Hydrocarbon Processing*
e
article
was
published
in
Members were urged to review and comment on the Amerlean Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Con­
ditioning Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE) 100.4P, a proposed
energy conservation standard for existing industrial
buildings.
CMA also prepared a strong letter object­
ing to ASHRAE's voluntary standards that could be es­
tablished as mandatory requirements for industry by
states and local governments.
Engineering
CMA supported the proposed revision of the Office of
Management and Budget Circular A-119, "Pederal par­
ticipation in the Development and Use of voluntary
Standards”.
Our comments assisted in obtaining
favorable revision of the circular*
e
CMA sent comments to the Hydraulic Institute express­
ing preference for a new 150 standard to cover both
50-cycle (European) and 60-cyele (US) pumps.
e
We supported adoption of Safety Related Maintenance
Requirements of National Fire Protection Association
70E (Electrical Safety Requirements for Employee
Workplaces).
e
CMA submitted negative ballot and comments on UL 891
(Dead-Front Switchboards) proposed as an American
National Standard.
e
CMA commented extensively to oppose adoption of Revi­
sion No. 6 of NEMA MG-1 (Motors and Generators) as an
American National Standard.
The revision does not
meet Department .of Labor noise guidelines.
e
we formed adoption of UL 536 (Flexible Metallic Hose)
as an American National Standard, after it was
revised to meet our objections.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS
General Programs
e
The EMC established a worn group to address
mental auditing issues.
environ­
CMA reviewed and commented on ”State of the Environ­
ment 1982”, a report prepared by the Conservation
Foundati n.
CMA 037930
On July 28 the Environmental Management Committee
(EMC) approved the following resolution:
"Based on
our present knowledge and an overall evaluation of
the substance of all congressional amendments to the
Clean Air Act under consideration, the EMC recommends
that CMA continue its efforts to obtain reasonable
Clean Air Act amendments this year".
CMA testified at the National Air Pollution Control
Techniques Advisory Committee (NAPCTAC) hearing on
July 21*22, 1982.
The testimony reviewed a draft of
a new source performance standard (NSPS) for the
control of volatile organic compound emissions from
distillation unit operations.
CMA completed it* flare efficiency test at John Zink
Company, Tulsa, OK.
EPA has excluded flares as con­
trol devices in recent regulations, citing poor ef­
ficiency as the reason.
This test could save member
companies millions in retrofit costs and in savings
for new facilities.
CMA submitted written comments to EPA and testified
before NAPCTAC on the draft NSPS for industrial
boilers.
EPA has indicated that many of CMA' s sug­
gestions will be accepted.
CMA submitted comments to the Agency on the Addition­
al Information Document for fugitive emissions of
organic compounds.
The Process Emission Regulations Task Group submitted
comments to EPA on the Polymers and Resins Control
Technique Guideline Document.
The EPA document is
still unfavorable to the chemical industry.
The EMC established an Air Regulations Task Group to
handle nonattainment, prevention of significant de­
terioration, and state implementation plan issues.
CMA submitted written comments to EPA on the Draft
Guideline for the Control of Volatile Organic Emis­
sions from Manufacture of High Density Polyethylene,
Polypropylene and Polystyrene Resins.
The Fugitive Emissions Work Group met with the Texas
Chemical Council to draft comments on EPA's back­
ground document for the fugitive emissions control
technique guideline, new source performance standard,
and national emission standard for hazardous air
P llutants.
6
Hazardous Waste Management Programs
‘On July 28, 1982, CMA testified before the Subcommit­
tee on Toxic Substances and Environmental Oversight,
Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, on
reauthorization of the Safe Drinking Water Act.
The
testimony recommended that states employ a use-class­
ification system as the basis for preserving the
multiple uses of groundwater.
e
The EMC adopted a statement of "Hazardous Waste Man­
agement Goals” as part of an overall hazardous waste
management plan for presentation to the Executive
Committee/Board of Directors in October.
e
The Hazardous Waste Response Center Task Group reach­
ed a tentative agreement with kpa -- Edison, New
Jersey Laboratory Office -- to cooperate in develop­
ing a manual for the cleanup of hazardous spills.
e
CMA prepared comments on the Conservation Founda­
tion's handbook entitled, "Siting Hazardous Waste
Management Facilities".
Solid Waste Regulatory Programs
e
On August 4, 1982, CMA testified before the Senate
Committee on Environment and Public Works' Subcom­
mittee on Environmental Pollution regarding Superfund
implementation.
e
On July 26, 1982, EPA published proposed standards
for landfills, surface impoundments, and landfarms.
These regulations are a great improvement over EPA’s
previous proposals, and track the recommendations of
the RCRA Regulations Task Group.
e
EPA has asked permission to modify the NRDC consoli­
dated permit settlement agreement, reducing allowable
expansions during interim status from 50% to 10%.
CMA has informed EPA that we will agree with the
change.
e
The EMC approved a resolution that "Mined out areas
and waste generated from mining and mineral process­
ing are not appropriate sites for clean-up action
‘under CERCLA."
e
On June 24, 1982, CMA presented testimony before the
Environmental Pollution Subcommittee of the Senate
Committee on Environment and Public Works on reau­
thorization and possible amendments of RCRA.
CMA 037932
mttr Programs
-On July 22, 1982, CMA testified before the Subconmittee on Environmental Pollution of the Senate Conmittee on the Environment and Public Works regarding
the Administration's proposed amendments to the Clean
Water Act.
e
A joint CMA/EPA statement was prepared on the conclu­
sions of the Five-Plant Study.
e
CMA submitted written comments
ability Manual.
e
CMA provided comments to the American Petroleum
Institute (API) on the CMA/API human health-based
water quality criteria report, "An Evaluation of
EPA's water Quality Criteria Oocunent for Arsenic
with Suggested Revisions."
The report, prepared by
Rolf Hartung, is an excellent discussion of the
shortcomings of the 1980 criteria for arsenic.
e
CMA cosponsored an aquatic toxicology workshop en­
titled, "Hazard Assessment for Complex Effluents,"
held August 22-27, 1982, attended by 24 invited
guests, at Valley Ranch, Wyoming.
e
The industry/EPA settlement agreement on the Consol­
idated Permit Regulations was signed on June 9.
CMA
will follow through to ascertain that the published
settlement language is consistent with the
agreement.
e
The EMC approved the positions on the Administra­
tion's Clean water Act Amendment proposals recom­
mended by the Water Policy Task Group.
e
On June 24, 1982, CMA held a Biological Assessment
workshop to evaluate the role of biological testing
in receiving water assessment or effluent toxicity
testing.
Twenty-four member company representatives
attended the workshop.
HEALTH,
to
the
Treat-
SAFETY AND CHEMICAL REGULATIONS DIVISION
Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee
e
EPA on
August 4, E. Hamilton Hurst (Nalco Chemical Company),
CRAC Chairman, testified for CMA before the Subcom­
mittee on T xic Substances and Environmental Ov rsight of the Senate Environmental Public w rks
C mmittee.
The Subcommittee held a TSCA oversight
hearing focusing
n negotiated testing; the FMN
CMA 037933
f
8
process in general and CMA's exemption petition;
Section 8 reporting; and international harmonization
July 26, CMA submitted a document to Dr. John
Todhunter entitled' "Information Systems Dnder TSCA.”
The document direasses EPA's Chemical Substances
Information Network (CSIN) in the context of what is
required by TSCA, and makes recommendations to EPA
for improving the handling of chemical information.
e
July 29( CMA submitted comments to EPA concerning an
Ageney project on the development of reporting
formats for Section 4 test data.
The comments
emphasize that this rigid, approach is inconsistent
with the Agency's increasingly flexible approach to
Section 4 testing.
e
August 6* CMA fiied comments on EPA's proposed rules
under Section 8(a) concerning follow-up processor
reporting and the inclusion of additional 1TC
chemicals in the final rule.
e
The Impact Analysis Task Group (IATG) is conducting a
pilot survey on chemical company activities to reduce
unreasonable risk.
Preliminary results are encourag­
ing.
The pilot survey will be completed in
mid-September.
e
The IATG reviewed the economic analyses that EPA is
using to support the proposed rule on data cost
reimbursement.
Results will be used in CMA's
comments on the proposed rule.
e
CRAC is periodically meeting with EPA staff to
increase communication between CMA and the Agency on
toxic substances issues.
Most recently. Don Clay and
Marcia Williams, Director and Deputy Director. Office
of Toxic Substances. EPA. met with CRAC members at
the July 21 meeting.
Occupational Safety and Health
e
The Safety Standards Task Group drafted comments on
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's
(OSHA) proposal to drop advisory standards that use
‘the word "should" instead of "shall."
e
At OSHA'S invitation. Safety Standards Task Group
members gave a sh rt c urse at the Agency on the
Balanced Performance Standard approach.
The audience
of about 40 pe pie were mainly OSHA standards writ­
ers. some uni n representatives and others.
The
concept was well-received.
CMA 037934
9
e
June 1, commants on OSHA's proposed Hazard! Communi­
cations Standard ware submittad to tha Agency.
while
•supporting promulgation of a fadaral standard, tha
commants encouraged changes in several specifics on
tha proposal (e«g., 1% cut-off for labeling hazardous
ingredients in mixtures, labeling reaction vessels,
HSDS specifics, etc.).
a
June 18, six witnesses presented testimony on the
Hazards Communications Standards comments at the OSHA
hearings in Washington, DC.
In addition, several
member companies presented statements both in
Washington, DC and at the regional hearings in
Houston, Los Angeles, and Detroit.
e
The booklet "Chemical Safety* An Industry perspective
on Right-to-Know Issues Analysis" is being distribu­
ted to member companies for use in lobbying for modi­
fication or withdrawal of state community right-toknow legislation.
This booklet is part of a packet
containing information on occupational cancer, pre­
emption, industry commitment, community issues, and,
other miscellaneous materials.
e
A series of radio interviews is being produced on the
topic of right-to-know.
Two topics, "Trade Secrets”
and "Research! Protecting People", have been com­
pleted, with four to five additional shows yet to be
produced.
A September 1 goal is set for completion.
e
National Public Radio interviewed Rita Comotto
OSHA's proposed Hazards Communication Standard.
e
R. Comotto attended the Gordon Conference on Environ­
mental Sciences!
Water.
e
H. Preifeld attended the Gordon
cology and Safety Evaluations.
Regulatory Impact special Committee
Conference
on
on
Toxi­
e
RISC created an Arsenic Work Group and authorized up
to $35,000 to examine data on occupational exposure
to arsenic.
The study will examine an apparent
"threshold" for carcinogenicity in humans.
e
'RISC created a RCRA Policy Model work Group to cri­
tique EPA's RCRA Risk/Cost Policy Model.
When oper­
ational, the model will select the optimal strategy
for handling waste streams.
RISC has completed its "Checklist for Reviewing Regu­
latory Impact Analyses (RlAs)".
The checklist
CMA 037935
10
will now be uitd to
government agencies.
critique
malyiti
don*
by
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS DIVISION
Comments on inorganic arsenic were filed with OSHA on
June 18, 1982.
OSHA’s public hearings on limited
reopening of the inorganic arsenic records were held
July 13-16.
Based on an analysis of 20% of the epi­
demiological data from Anaconda Smelters, CMA's con­
sultant concluded that exposures below 500 ug/m^ do
not present an increased risk of respiratory cancer
to workers.
If this analysis is correct, it will be
the first scientific demonstration of a threshold for
an alleged human carcinogen.
CMA's Regulatory Impact
Special Committee (RISC) committed up to $25,000 to
cofund the effort to complete the analysis of the
remaining data from the Anaconda study.
e
The final report.on a six-hour acute inhalation study
on allyl chloride was received from the contractor.
This completes the panel’s research activities.
CMA released the final report on an ortho-dichlorobenzene (ODCB) teratology study in rats and rabbits.
Exposure to 0, 100, 200 or 400 ppm ODCB via inhala­
tion was not embryotoxic or teratogenie in either
species•
e
On June 1, the Ethylene Dibromide Panel filed com­
ments on OSHA's ANPR regarding the occupational
standard for ethylene dibromide.
e
OSHA and the Public Citizen Health Research Group
filed notions for summary judgment in the pending
lawsuit on ethylene oxide.
The Ethylene Oxide indus­
try Council's (EOIC) Legal Task Force recommended
that the Council not get directly involved in the
suit.
The two major issues in the suit aret 1) the
need for an Emergency Temporary Standard (ETS) on EO;
and, 2) 0SHA/EPA jurisdiction overregu1ation of
workers in the sterilant deviee industry.
EPA filed an affidavit in a New York District Court
which described the Agency's plans for acting on a
backlog of XTC chemicals under TSCA Section 4(a).
Thirteen chemicals are scheduled for a test rule, or
.decision not to test, in the third and fourth quar­
ters of 1982.
Methyl ethyl ketone and methyl isobu­
tyl ketone were substituted for the alkyl epoxides
(including ethylene oxide) and methylenedianiline•
The latter two appeared on an earlier listing.
The
affidavit does not affect EPA's internal timetable
CMA 037936
I
11
for decision on ethylene oxide which calls for "de­
cision document" preparation by the Agency in early
.September and a Federal Register notice announcing
that decision in December 1982*
The EOIC submitted
to CPA a study plan for an EO voluntary test
program*
e
Of the $1.9 million committed to the Fluorocarbon
Research Program for calendar year 1983* S100*000 has
been allocated to obtaining a better understanding of
the biological and climatic effects of potential
ozone depletion or redistribution.
The state of
current knowledge* the validity of results reported
in the literature, and the adequacy of the
methodology used to obtain these results will be
investigated.
e
California/OSHA has released a Hazard Alert on
ethylene glycol- monoethyl ether (EGEE)* ethylene
glycol monomethyl ether (EGME) * ethylene glycol
monoethyl ether acetate (EGEEA) and ethylene glycol
monomethyl ether acetate (EGMEA).
The Panel submitted a letter to the ZTC outlining the
ongoing research program on EGEE.
Based upon the
existence of this test program* the ITC has agreed to
defer consideration of adding EGEE to the ITC list
until early 1983.
e
A voluntary test program on isophorone has been sub­
mitted to EPA by isophorone producers in the Ketones
Program*
The test program consists of an inhalation
teratology study and a mutagenicity battery.
The
National Toxicology Program (NTP) is already
conducting a bioassay on isophorone.
e
The Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Program Panel
filed comments in response to EPA's Proposed Rule to
exclude the production of PCBs in "closed" and
"controlled waste" manufacturing processes from the
provisions of Section 6(e) of TSCA.
The Panel asked
that EPA withdraw its current proposal and publish a
new rule which would establish a regulatory cut-off
waste streams that do not pose an unreasonable risk.
.The Panel Chairman testified at an EPA hearing on the
use of electrical equipment containing PCBs.
In
addition* EPA held a legislative hearing for the
closed and controlled waste process rule on July 26*
1982.
Industry spokespe pie and NRDC/EDF testified.
EPA's response to questions submitted by CNA appears
to confirm that EPA's analytical appr ach is a
CMA 037937
12
"■•arch for zero" in measuring PCB concentration*.
request for cross-examination was made.
e
A
Elars Bioresearch Laboratories toxicology facilities
closed with screening for the CMA Phase IX zinc
dialkyl dithiophosphates (ZDDP) research in progress.
The protocol for this study is being rebid.
EPA is considering ZODP for test rule development
The Office of Toxic Substances has
requested production information from the ZODP
manufacturers on the Panel.
e
EPA is concerned because methylenedianaline (MDA)
appears to be a potent carcinogen and they plan to
propose a test rule by December 21, 1982*
The MDA
Panel is considering negotiating with EPA on a
voluntary testing program*
e
The Vinyl Chloride Program received a final report on
research techniques and methods for the detection and
prevention of carcinogenesis in the industrial
worker*
This report is the last in a aeries from a
three-year research grant to the University of
Louisville.
e
The Toluenediamines (TDA) Panel met with EPA to dis­
cuss the XTC recommendation on phenylenediamines.
BPA's concern for environmental effects testinq has
been reduced since TDA appears to readily degrade and
there is little release to the environment.
CMA
I
ft
I
I
CMA 037938
I
EXHIBIT L
REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
WILLIAM M. STOVER
BUDGET AND TAXATION:
PRESIDENT GIVES TAX INCREASES NEEDED PUSH
In July the House and Senate agreed to a compromise budget resolution that
would produce a deficit of $103.9 billion in Fiscal 1983. Overcoming almost
impossible odds. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Bob Dole (R-Kans.) held his
troops together in the Senate to pass a three-year, $98 billion tax increase
shortly before the Fourth of July. The House Democratic leadership confounded
longtime Washington observers by electing to go immediately to conference on
the Senate tax bill without attempting to adopt improving amendments.
The conservative revolt against the tax bill that failed to materialize
in the Senate, showed initial signs of strength in the House. Led by Congress­
man Jack Kemp (R-NY), the early opponnents of the Senate tax program included
many of the same representatives who supported passage of the President's 1981
tax program. Just as several key business trade organizations announced their
opposition to major segments of the Senate bill, the President committed the
prestige of his office and his special powers of "friendly persuasion" to
encourage recalcitrant Congressmen to support passage of the Senate tax program.
The Senate Finance tax package represented a significant retreat from the
business tax reforms adopted in 1981. Both Senate Finance Committee Chairman
Dole and Senate Budget Committee Chairman Domenici (R-NM) emphasized these
changes were needed to reduce the level of projected Federal deficits over the
.next three years. Several provisions in this package would place added tax
burdens on capital intensive industries, especially the chemical industry.
Meeting in marathon negotiating sessions, House-Senate conferees reached
a conference agreement which was remarkably close to the package reported by the
Senate Finance Committee. The most important provisions of the conference
agreement affecting capital formation included:
o
Reduction of ACRS (Depreciation) and Investment Tax Credit
The conference agreement would reduce the basis of property
for ACRS purposes by one-half the amount of the investment
tax credit and/or energy tax credit. In general, the effect
of this provision would be to reduce the value of the invest­
ment tax credit from 10 percent to approximately 7.8 percent.
As alternative, businesses could continue to take full ACRS
benefits, provided the amount of the investment tax credit
was reduced to 8 percent.
CMA 037945
The maximum amount of tax that can be offset by
the investment tax credit would be reduced from
90 ta 85 percent of actual tax liability.
I
Most importantly, the accelerated rates of ACRS
recovery now scheduled for property placed in
service after 1984 would be repealed. To chemical
companies this was the most important single
feature of the 1981 tax legislation.
o
o
Minimum Tax and Reduction of Corporate Tax Benefits Including
DISC
In addition to the present corporate minimum tax, the conference
agreement would reduce certain enumerated corporate tax benefits
including DISC deferrals by 15 percent.
Section 936 Possessions Corporations Credit Limited
j
i
The section 936 possessions corporations credit affecting
investment by U.S. corporations in Puerto Rico would be
severely restricted. In addition, the bill would require
acceleration of corporate estimated tax payments and would
impose additional limitations on corporate pension contributions
and benefits.
The conferees rejected a last minute effort of a business coalition to reduct
the bill's impact on capital formation and corporate after-tax earnings.
At present, there appears to be no enthusiastic reception from House
Democrats for any proposal to compromise on this issue. In addition, there is
concern that if action is not taken to reduce ACRS this year, the budget deficits
projected for 1985 and 1986 would be unacceptably high.
CLEAN AIR ACTi
OUTLOOK BLEAK FOR HELPFUL AMENDMENTS
(As of August 16) Clean Air Act amendments are being considered by both
the Senate Environment Committee and the House Commerce Committee in an effort
to report bills before the August Congressional recess.
The House mark-up of H.R. 5252 resumed August 10, focussing on Section 112 —
the point at which Chairman John Dingell (D-MI) had recessed mark-up on April 28.
Chairman Dingell and Ranking Minority member James T. Broyhill (R-NC) had said
that continuation would depend upon resolution of four issues — Prevention of
Significant'Deterioration (PSD), acid rain, mobile sources, and hazardous air
pollutants (Section 112). The Dingell-Broyhill leadership worked with a group
j
i
CMA 037946
of "swing vote" members to produce a compromise package which they hoped would
result in a safe margin of votes. More Democrats were especially needed, besides
the four who have voted with Dingell previously.
Despite the prospect of only a total of 6 Democrats in support of a com­
promise package, Dingell indicated the first week of August that mark-up would
resume, and the legislative language of the compromise finally was released.
The CMA Environmental Management Committee task group assessment of the two
parts of the compromise on which CMA has an official position was: 1) on the
issue of PSD, the compromise was much better than present law; and 2) on
Section 112, the compromise was within EMC policy guidelines. CMA participated
in the Clean Air Working Group effort to secure votes for the leadership com­
promise — on Section 112 the amendment was to be offered by Congressman Thomas
A. Luken (D-OH). The Luken language would amend the April 28 Broyhill substitute
to Florio's amendment which provided for automatic listing of substances under
Section 112.
The outcome, on August 11,. was defeat of the Broyhill-Luken substitute by21 to 20 (1 abstention).
The final vote was on adoption of the Florio amendment, amended by Congress­
man w. j. (Billy) Tauzin (D-LA) to provide for a de-listing procedure after
automatic listing. The Tauzin/Florio language passed 22-20.
Chairman Dingell later told a group of industry, labor and Administration
representatives that he must move ahead despite the defeat on Section 112.
In the Senate, the situation in the Committee on Environment and Public
Works is far from encouraging. To date, there has been little positive benefit
in amendments on non-attainment, and virtually nothing useful in the PSD and
ambient standard-setting (secondary) amendments. In addition, an acid rain
amendment passed 15-1 on July 22, providing for 8 million tons reduction in
annual emissions of sulfur dioxide in 12 years. While the amendment will directly
impact the electric power industry it will indirectly affect all companies'
utility bills.
To date, the Committee has not dealt with Section 112 in mark-up. Committee
staff have been interested in the language of a bill, by Senator Bennett Johnston
(D-LA), s. 2795, introduced July 30. It provides for automatic listing of
substances without specifying the 37 currently under review by EPA.
If the Senate Committee does not draw from Senator Johnston's amendment or
the Florio-Tauzin amendment in the House, it could decide to approve the pending
committee print, which is also highly undesirable.
Clean .Air Working Group efforts are under way for introduction of a positive
comprehensive bill on the Senate floor if the current bill is reported out of
the Environment Coimnittee. A comprehensive bill could be crafted from the Garn,
Byrd, and Riegle-Levin bills, none of which have been considered in the Stafford
Committee.
CMA 037947
CLEAN WATER ACT LEGISLATION
The Administration has racantly sent its package of comprehensive Clean
Water Act amendments to Congress for consideration this year. CMA has a number
of major concerns with the Administration’s package. First* it does not address
BAT modification; second, it maintains national categorical standards for pre­
treatment; third, it establishes administrative penalties and felony sanctions.
Another major issue to be considered during the clean water debate, but not
contained in the Administration's proposal, is the establishing of Federal Common
Law. CMA is strongly opposed to a part of the Clean Water Act amendments.
The Senate Environment and Public Works Subcommittee on Environmental
Pollution, chaired by Senator John Chafee (R-RI), held hearings on July 21, 22,
28 and 29. CMA, represented by Mr. Monte Throdahl (Monsanto Company), testified
on July 22 and focussed primarily on the BAT modification issue. Senator Chaf««',
subcommittee is not expected to begin mark-up until mid-September.
On the House side, the Public works and Transportation Subcommittee on water I
Resources, chaired by Representative Robert Roe (D-NJ), held hearings on the
Clean Water Act on July 27, 28 and 29. Q4A was once again represented by
Mr. Throdahl. We presented an in-depth explanation of the history and success
in implementing Best Available Technology (BAT). Chairman Roe entered into an
extensive discussion with Mr. Throdahl on the BAT issue which clearly indicated
that the Congressman fully understands and appreciates the need for flexibility
in the application of BAT to avoid "treatment for treattnent's sake". Representatii
Roe's subcommittee is not expected to begin mark-up until September.
CMA has initiated an extensive media effort on Clean Water legislation.
* We are also working with the business community's clean water coalition organized
under the Washington Environmental Coordinating Cosmittee (WECC).
PENDING AMENDMENTS TO THE RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND RECOVERY ACT (RCRA)
The House Energy and Commerce Consnittee has reported H.R. 6307, which contain
a number of amendments to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act which are of
concern to CMA. The bill was then referred to the House Public Works and Transpor*
tation Committee for consideration of Section 4 (Hazardous Wastes Mixed with
Domestic Sewage) and Section 9 (National Groundwater Coamission). Mr. Jeff
Zimmerman, Occidental Petroleum Corporation, testified on behalf of CMA on May 26
before the Public Works Committee. On June 11, the Public Works Committee report^
H.R. 6307 with changes to these two sections that would delete the reference to
RCRA in section 4 and would expand the groundwater study beyond hazardous waste
contamination. The accompanying report (No. 97-950, Part LL) also raises many of
the concerns expressed in CMA testimony.
During the same time period, House Commerce Subcommittee staff was meeting
to attempt to address several issues raised by CMA and other groups. On June 24, 1
CMA 037948
I
Congressman Florio (D-NJ) introduced H.R. 6699 in response to these issues.
The bill, which Representative Florio says he will offer as a floor amendment to
H.R. 6307, would change the word "substances" back to "hazardous wastes" in
Section 6 (Burning and Blending of Hazardous Wastes as Fuel) and Section 11
(Beneficial Use of Hazardous Waste). These changes will satisfy a serious
concern of CMA.
Commerce Committee Chairman Dingell (D-MICH) has requested and been granted
an open rule which means H.R. 6307 could be considered on the House floor before
the August Congressional recess. This could allow floor amendments to resolve
additional concerns expressed by CMA and other groups, including revisions to
Section 3 (Small Generator Exemption), Section 7(a) (Final Permitting Conditions),
and Section 10 (Creation of Federal Common Law).
In a new development, Representative Floyd Fithian (D-IND) received
permission from the House Rules Consnittee to offer a superfund amendment to H.R.
6307. The Fithian amendment would change the financial contribution ratio for
municipal dumpsite clean-up. The Superfund now requires a responsible municipality/
state to contribute 50 percent of the money to clean up a site. Representative
Fithian wants to change it to only a 10 percent contribution from the municipality/
state. This amendment would put additional financial strains on the limited
resources of the Fund, and therefore CMA is opposed to the Fithian amendment.
Uncertainty remains as to how the Senate will deal with the comprehensive
amendments to RCRA contained in H.R. 6307. On May 27, the Senate Committee on
Environment and Public Works reported S. 2432, which does little more than re­
authorize and provide two-year funding for RCRA. Because of the House activity.
Senator Chafee held an additional day of hearings on June 24 to receive testimony
on many of the issues in the House bill. CMA testimony was presented by Mr. Bill
Moore, Rohm and Haas Company.
On June 17, Senators Hart and Moynihan introduced S. 2644, which would re­
quire EPA to list, within 18 months, hazardous waste which could no longer be
disposed of in landfills. It is reported that Senator Hart will offer this as
as amendment to S. 2432.
In sumnary, after an extremely fast start, the process to amend RCRA has
slowed but not stopped. It appears likely that some changes will be made to RCRA,
but it is unclear what form a final bill will take. CMA continues to bring its
concerns to the attention of the appropriate members of Congress.
TESTIMONY ON SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT
The Senate Environment and Public Works Subcommittee on Toxic Substances
and Environmental Oversight (Gorton, R-WASH) held a fourth and final hearing
July 28 on SDWA reauthorization. These hearings are important because they will
focus on who has the authority (Federal, State, or Local government) to manage
ground water resources and the recharge areas. Mr. Fred Steinberg of PPG Industries
testified for CMA at these hearings in support of some minor reforms to the SWDA
and in opposition to federal management of ground water resources.
CMA 037949
ENVIRONMENT. SAFETY AND HEALTH - EPA OVERSIGHT BY FOUR HOUSE SUBCOMMITTEES
On July 21 and 22, four Subcommittees chaired by Congressmen Moffett (D-Conn.)
Scheuer (D-NY), Gore (D-Tenn.) and Waxman (D-Cal.) held joint hearings on EPA
oversight. Though ostensibly a review of the first 14 months of Anne Gorsuch's
administration at EPA, it was called a "political sideshow" and a "witch hunt"
by several Republican members including Congressmen Larry Winn (R-Kans.), Bob
members ably defended Mrs. Gorsuch. Their willingness to characterize the
hearings for what they were - a media circus - had a positive effect on the type
and content of the media coverage. No new issues were raised, as the same litany
previously aired in the media was heard again; budget cuts, personnel changes and
morale, groundwater strategy, liquids in landfills, RCRA and Superfund implemented
TSCA, enforcement efforts, lead in gasoline/Thriftway, secret meetings, research
and development, and the like.
The following conclusions may be drawn. First and foremost, Anne Gorsuch
more than held her own. She ably withstood the political attacks, and responded
with good points of her own. The media coverage was not unfavorable to her. One
TV report called it "a trial not a hearing", film clips showed her cool, calm
and collected throughout, and quoted one Democrat Congressman calling the hearing
a "waste of time." Second, the chemical industry was not made a target of the
hearings. CMA was mentioned only once or twice, for example in connection with
our PMN exemptions petition. Third, we believe the hearings failed to achieve
the Democrats' purposes. Although not permitted to present live testimony, OlA's
efforts to work with Minority Members of the Subcoemiittee and with EPA paid off.
CMA submitted a statement for the record of the hearing.
SAFETY AND HEALTH - CMA TESTIFIES AT SENATE HEARING ON TSCA OVERSIGHT
On August 4, Senator Slade Gorton's (R-Wash.) Subcommittee on Toxic
Substances and Environmental Oversight (Cononittee on Environment and Public Works)
held a hearing on TSCA Oversight. Hamilton Hurst, Vice President of Nalco Chemicil,
Company, testified on behalf of CMA. SOCMA, EPA's Dr. Todhunter, NRDC and the
Conservation Foundation also testified. The hearing focused on 1) negotiated/
voluntary testing under section 4; 2) the PMN process in general, and CMA's
exemptions petition for low risk chemicals under section 5(h)(4); 3) EPA's
section 8(a) reporting rule; and 4) international harmonization efforts/OECD-MPD.
The entire tone of the Senate hearing was constructive and not adversarial,
unlike recent House media-oriented events reviewing EPA's first 14 months under
Anne Gorsuch. CMA achieved its goals of providing a balanced review of EPA's
accomplishments in implementing TSCA, and educating the Subcommittee as to
chemical industry concerns regarding reasonable interpretations of TSCA. Chairman
Gorton learned of the real progress being made by the Agency, and of the advantage
to the public and EPA, as well as to the industry, that will result from
negotiated testing agreements and PMN exemptions. Barring unforeseen development!,
the Subconmiittee sees no need to consider amendments to TSCA at this time, and
1
will return to TSCA next year.
4
I
CMA 037960
SAFETY AND HEALTH - PMN TEST DATA
Congressman James Florio (D-NJ) has requested the Office of Technology
Assessment (OTA) to conduct a review and analysis of the adequacy of the
toxicological test data contained in the premanufacture notifications (PMNs)
submitted under section 5 of TSCA. Security procedures have been established
to protect confidential business-information. The study is expected to be
completed this Fall, and depending on its results, Mr. Florio will undoubtedly
hold hearings either later in the Fall, if Congress is in session, or in the
Spring of next year in connection with TSCA reauthorization. Depending on the
outcome of the study, Mr. Florio can be expected to push for some type of fixed
set of PMN testing for all new chemicals, along the lines of the European
system (OECD-Minimum Premarket Data). CMA is handling this issue with great care,
we have written to EPA expressing our concerns about the handling of confidential
business information and about the scope of the review.
SAFETY AND HEALTH - ANIMAL RESEARCH TESTING
Congressman Doug Walgren's (D-Pa.) Science Subcommittee held hearings last
Fall and this Spring on a bill to promote non-animal testing and impose limitations
on toxicological research. Stringent limitations would be placed on research
laboratories including rigorous accreditation procedures, inspection of facilities,
review by community representatives and veterinarians, and recordkeeping. On
August 11, H.R. 6928 was reported by the full Science Committee of the House.
So
long as the Administration continues to oppose it, passage by the Senate is not
considered likely. CMA is monitoring developments.
SAFETY AND HEALTH - COMPARATIVE RISK ANALYSIS
A House Science Subcommittee held mark-up on Congressman Don Ritter's
(R-Pa.) risk analysis bill, H.R. 6159. The measure would establish a 30 month
research and demonstration program to improve comparative risk analysis techniques
in regulatory decision making, and to coordinate risk evaluation efforts among
nine federal regulatory agencies. The bill was reported out of the full Science
Committee, and passed by the House August 2. The CMA Regulatory Impact Special
Committee supports the concepts of the legislation.
SAFETY AND HEALTH - GENETIC SCREENING
The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA), the scientific arm of the Congress,
is studying the extent to which companies are using genetic and cytogenetic
screening in the workplace. The study was requested by Congressman Albert Gore
(D-Tenn.), whose House Science Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight had
previously’held hearings last Fall and in June of this year. Although preliminary
results of the study show only a handful of the Fortune 500 companies are
presently doing any biochemical or cytogenetic testing, Mr. Gore seems predisposed
toward the position that many companies are rushing headlong into using such
screening as an employment tool that would discriminate against certain classes
of employees or applicants for employment. The OTA study is expected to be
completed this Fall, and Mr. Gore undoubtedly will have more to say on the subject.
A CMA member company testified at the previous hearing and we are monitoring
developments.
CMA 037951
ENERGY;
CMA TESTIFIES IN FAVOR OF NATURAL GAS DEREGULATION
On July 30, 1982, CMA testified before the Fossil and Synthetic Fuels
Subcommittee of the House Energy and Coimnerce Committee. The CMA Energy
Committee Chairman, James D. Beatty, Manager, Energy, - Engineering Government
Relations of the Procter and Gamble Company, presented the CMA viewpoint urging
that a phased deregulation of all natural gas begin by a date certain.
The
testimony addressed the serious shortcomings of the Natural Gas Policy Act of
1978, citing examples, and focussed on supply problems and inequities caused
by differing volumns of pre-NGPA gas in the various pipelines. The CMA testimony
came as part of a users' panel during the second in a set of seven House hearings
examining issues regarding natural gas decontrol. The previous hearing was also
devoted to receiving the comments of consumers of natural gas, and two studies
regarding the potential impact of deregulation were released. Gas distributors
and pipeline companies more recently presented testimony in early August. Further
hearings will soon be announced, and the Federal Energy Regulation Coimnission
(FERC) is expected to testify after Labor Day.
CMA coalition efforts continue and communication materials are being prepared.
There are no indications that proposals for natural gas deregulation will progress
beyond the hearing stage in this session of Congress.
ENERGY
ENERGY TAXES AND/OR FEES
j
Rather than prepare a separate revenue raising measure, the House ways
and Means Coimnittec voted to go directly to conference on the Senate-passed tax
bill. The bill prepared by the Senate Finance Committee in July does not
include the imposition of an oil import fee or any type of energy tax. However,
a ways and Means Committee staff memorandum does include a listing of energy
taxes and fees as possible items to raise revenue. The scope of conference
activity was limited to the provisions of the bill and existing law, therefore,
consideration of a tax or fee on energy were not addressed.
CMA efforts continue in opposition to any additional energy taxes or fees,
including imposition of a broad-based, ad valorem, "BTU" tax or oil import fee.
Our advocacy has emphasized the chemical industry dependence on natural gas as
feedstock, and that federal spending cuts and passage of accelerated natural gas
decontrol within the existing tax structure would be more desirable ways to
reduce the budget deficit.
ENERGY.-
I
j
1
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
On August 3, the President signed legislation setting a minimum fill rate
for the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) and extending until December 31, 1983,
the antitrust exemption for oil companies participating in the International Energy
Agreement (IEA). Public Law 97-229 requires the filling of the SPR (presently
267 million barrels of crude oil) at a rate of at least 220,000 barrels per day
with an ultimate goal of 750 million barrels. The legislation also calls for
the President to prepare a plan for withdrawal from the reserve. The plan will not
be subject to Congressional veto and will be triggered in the event of a severe
petroleum shortfall.
CMA 037952
1
CMA continues to closely monitor emergency preparedness issues because of
the possibility of legislation and adoption in various states of price and
allocation plans for dealing with am oil shortage.
ENERGY;
REORGANIZATION Of THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
A bill has been introduced in the Senate that would merge most of the
Department of Energy functions into the Department of Commerce. A high priority
for legislative activity is being sought by the Administration, but little Senate
support has been evident.
In the House, no comparable bill has been introduced
and some Congressional critics have indicated that the Administration has not
provided the leadership necessary to move the bill forward. There is very little
likelihood of legislation in this session of Congress.
TRADE;
PETROCHEMICAL DISCUSSIONS
The international petrochemical business is in distress. This has resulted
in unprecedented discussions between governments about solutions to present and
expected market difficulties.
The EEC and the U.S. government have had three meetings which focussed on
the EEC claim that U.S. oil and gas price controls were an unfair subsidy to
U.S. petrochemical producers. These talks are dormant, but dumping charges hav
been filed against a number of U.S. products.
The Japanese have similarly claimed injury to the Japanese domestic and
export markets by U.S. exports of petrochemicals. The first govemment-togovemment talks have been held and more are to follow. The Japanese are considering
* filing dumping charges against U.S. products.
The U.S. and Mexican governments have agreed to petrochemical discussions
in the belief that there are difficulties ahead between the two countries. The
conversion of Mexico's oil and gas reserves into exportable quantities of petro­
chemicals is expected before the end of this decade.
Advisors to these discussions have been selected by the government from
candidates proposed by OlA. They have participated in the talks with the EEC and
will similarly participate in the Japanese and Mexican talks.
TRADE;
COMPETITIVE ASSESSMENT STUDIES
Two studies are being made in the government on the future competitive position
of the U.S. petrochemical industry. The United States International Trade Commission
report investigates the impact on the U.S. industry of expanding petrochemical
industries in oil producing nations. In the Department of Commerce, a special
CMA 037953
I
office has been created by Secretary Baldrige for competitive assessment
studies of U.S. industries. The U.S. petrochemical industry report will be the
first effort.
CHA is cooperating with government departments in these studies.
TRADE;
RECIPROCITY LEGISLATION
Senator Danforth's bill (S. 2094), "The Reciprocal Trade and Investment Act
of 1982", was reported out of the Senate Finance Trade Subcommittee Hay 20. The
House counterpart is H.R. 6773, introduced by Representative Frenzel. Provisions
include extension of § 301 of the trade law to cover services, intellectual pro­
perty rights, foreign direct investment and negotiating authority for hightechnology goods.
As of August 3, S. 2094 has 30 co-sponsors and several endorsements from
business and agricultural groupjs. It is expected to go to the floor soon after
Congress returns from its August 18 recess. Concern exists over addition of
protectionist (domestic content) amendments which, according to Danforth, would
kill the bill. The domestic content bill in the House is H.R. 5133, and it has
220 co-sponsors.
The International Trade Committee, at the direction of the Executive
Committee, sent its endorsement of S. 2094 (excluding amendments) to the Senate
Finance Committee on July 19.
TRADE;
EXPORT TRADING COMPANY LEGISLATION
I
Export trading company legislation has been passed by both houses and is
now subject to joint conference.
(The vehicle is S. 734 with amendments — include:
language from Representative St. Germain's H.R. 6016).
If passed into law, a new
form of joint export effort will be possible. The CHA International Trade
Committee will determine how to advise member companies on use of the export trading
company form of marketing.
TRANSPORTATION;
MARITIME REFORM PROPOSALS DELAYED
j
The maritime reform bill reported out by the Senate Commerce, Science and
Transportation Committee is still awaiting floor action due to opposition by
Senators Howard Metzenbaum (D-OH) and Strom Thurmond (R-SC). The delay has been
created because of antitrust implication, and because of Senator Slade Gorton's
(R-WA) opposition to an unrelated bill involving the Illinois Brick case. S. 1593
is supported by CMA and reflects consensus reached between representatives for
shippers and carriers.
House floor action on the Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee-reported
proposal, H.R. 4374, has been delayed until the resolution of antitrust concerns
by the House Judiciary Committee. Jurisdiction over the bill was asserted by the
Judiciary Committee and mark-up was completed in late July, with support from the .
Administration . Negotiations between the two Committees continue, and the questi4*
CMA 037964
now is which version will emerge from the House Rules Committee, CMA generally
supports the Judiciary version and would encourage no further amendments except
for language clarification.
If a unified version is presented to the House Rules
Committee, it is possible the bill could go to the floor under suspension or without
the opportunity for change.
Passage of a House bill similar to the Senate
measure would offer the Senate leadership the means to adopt the House bill, thus
foregoing conference.
CMA efforts continue as part of the Shippers' Coordinating Committee on
Maritime Reform.
TRANSPORTATION;
CANADIAN DIVERSION
Legislation that would restrict the movement of u.S. made products through
Canadian ports was unexpectedly sent to the House Rules Committee last month.
H.R. 3637 had been labeled non-eontroversial in an attempt to gain the opportunity
for House floor consideration. ; A rule for the bill was not given.
Opposition to the bill came primarily from a group of midwestern Congressmen,
and from CMA. Efforts continue to heep the bill from reaching the House floor.
REGULATORY REFORM LEGISLATION
The long delay in House consideration of regulatory reform legislation may
be nearing an end. Earlier this year the House Judiciary Committee favorably
reported an omnibus regulatory reform bill, H.R. 746 (Danielson-D-CA). Since
that time a new subcommittee chairman, Congressman Sam B. Hall, Jr., (O-TX), has
been named for the subcommittee that developed the legislation.
a
On March 24 the Senate passed S. 1080, the Regulatory Reform Act. S. 1080
is an amended version of legislation introduced by Senator Paul Laxalt (R-NEV)
and is strongly supported by the business comnunity. CMA was a part of the
business coalition seeking passage of this important legislation.
In July, the business coalition stepped up its efforts to secure House
consideration of H.R. 746 before the August recess. Speaker Thomas P. "Tip"
O'Neill and other members of the House Democratic leadership had reservations
about the legislative veto and Judicial review provisions of the bill. Their
problems, however, may be resolved by amendments which would bring H.R. 746 closer
to the language of S. 1080. Although chances for House floor consideration of
H.R. 746 in August are small, regulatory reform legislation may yet be enacted
in the present Congress.
CMA 037955
I
t
PATENTS:
PATENT TERM RESTORATION BILL REPORTED
CMA has actively supported passage of patent tern restoration legislation,
H.R. 6444 and its predecessor bill H.R. 1937 (Kastenmeier-D-wlSC). On July 28,
the House Judiciary Committee favorably reported H.R. 6444 to the House.
y
H.R. 6444 would add up to 7 years of patent life to products that must
undergo government-mandated testing and review. During the mark-up of the
bill by the Judiciary Committee, a technical amendment was approved which would
designate the beneficiary of patent term restoration as "the product sponsor"
rather than "recipient of marketing approval." This change would ensure that
the Toxic Substances Control Act would be entitled to the benefits of patent
term restoration.
r
Patent term restoration legislation passed the Senate by voice vote last
year. Although H.R. 6444 has some 111 co-sponsors in the House it is currently
opposed by a coalition of organized labor, certain consumer groups, and the
generic drug industry.
The business coalition supporting early passage of H.R. 6444, including
CMA and NACA, is following the leadership of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
Association (PMA) which supports early House passage of H.R. 6444 without further
amendment.
It is anticipated that H.R. 6444 may be brought up on the House floor under
suspension of the rules, thus requiring that at least two-thirds of the Members
present vote for the bill. Representatives of CMA member companies have been
alerted to contact Members of Congress urging them to vote for passage of
PATENTS:
EMPLOYEE INVENTOR LEGISLATION
I
Congressman Robert Kastenmeier (D-WISC) has introduced two bills that
would govern the patent rights of employed inventors. H.R. 4723 and H.R. 6635
1
would prohibit pre-invention assignment agreements between employers and employees
which transfer to the employer rights to any invention that is not an "employment *
invention" or a "service invention." H.R. 6635 also calls for "adequate
compensation for the (inventor's) service invention."
On July 29, the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Courts, Civil Liberties
and the Administration of Justice held a public hearing to receive support testimony
from the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers and from the AFL-CIO.
Additional hearings may be scheduled in the future.
The Patent and Trademark Committee is reviewing this legislation and will
develop appropriate CMA comments, but it is unlikely that legislation on this
subject could be enacted in this Congress.
CMA 037966
I
13
STATS AFFAIRS REPORT
legislative and regulatory activity
By late July and August, most stata lagislaeurts had adjourned for the year.
In tha othars, suroter raeassas wart in affact. Tha following statas art expected
to reconvtna in tha fall in regular station: New Jarsay, Massachusatts,
California, Illinois, Michigan, Naw York, Ohio and Pennsylvania. Several othar
statas hava hald or will hold special sassions in 1963 to addrass budgat matters
and othar pressing concerns such as unemployment and taxes.
Regulatory activity has also decreased reflecting sumer schedules.
STATE AFFAIRS PLANNING GROUP
Tha Stats Affairs Planning Group, organized in April at tha direction of
CMA's Executive Coamittee, has held numerous meetings during tha turner months and
has now completed its final report which is being presented in August to tha Executive
Comittee. Tha report focusses on:
Outlook for increased stata legislative and regulatory activity.
Currant and emerging issues.
CMA organizational needs to effectively address state affairs.
Status and role of state chemical industry councils.
Programs of allied associations.
. COMMITTEES AND TASK GROUP ACTIVITY
with slower legislative and regulatory activity during the summer, the
SASC and its task groups have concentrated on preparation for the 1983 legislative
sessions. Major activities include:
Continued planning for four regional CMA State Affairs Issues
Seminars to be held in October and November in Port Chester (NY),
Atlanta (GA), Chicago (XL), and Denver (CO). These sessions are
designed to highlight state legislative and regulatory trends and to
acquaint plant managers, regional state government relations rep­
resentatives, state trade and business associations and allied
industry representatives with chemical industry issues and CMA's
posture on them.
Profiling of individual states is continuing at SASC meetings with
Delaware, Ohio and New York having been addressed to date.
1
CMA 037957
i
Meetings of the Network Task Group in Minnesota and Wisconsin
during July. These meetings are designed to enhance the working
relationship between CMA and the local chemical industry in those
states while exploring the need and desirability of establishing
state chemical organizations.
t
Electronic Services Task Group completed development of service
and performance guidelines for legislative and regulatory tracking
vendors. Presentations by potential vendors for the 1983-84 session
were held on August 26-27. Once a vendor is selected, all member
companies will be invited to participate in the program.
NATIONAL STATE GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS ANNUAL MEETINGS
During July and August, the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)
i
and the National Governors Association held their annual meetings. Policy
making sessions on chemical industry issues were limited and no significant adverts :
positions emerged.
Interaction between the NCSL and the business community
continues to increase to the benefit of all parties. CMA had an exhibit at the
NCSL meeting explaining our Chemtrec activities and the industry's efforts to manag(
hazardous waste. State Affairs staff and member company representatives also
worked with NCSL staff to place industry spokesmen on hazardous materials
t
transportation and biotechnology panels.
f
I
ISSUES UPDATE
RIGHT TO KNOW
I
f
As previously reported, Wisconsin passed a worker right-to-know bill earlier
this year which contained extensive record keeping requirements. The Governor
then vetoed these provisions and his veto was recently sustained. Proponents of
right-to-know in Wisconsin may attempt to revise the law in the near future to makt
it more stringent.
i
Regulations implementing California's right-to-know law continue to work
their way through the state administrative process. If and whan they emerge, the
California law will present the most significant actual compliance problems in the *
nation.
Consnunity Riaht-to-Know continues to be extremely active in California
localitiessuch as Santa Clara, Contra Costa and Sacramento.
Initially, most
communities based their ordinances on the model proposal drafted by the State
Health Department, but the more recent ordinances are becoming more diverse.
Cincinnati (OH) finally enacted a community right-to-know bill during the summer,
while the companion proposal in Norwood (OH) was vetoed.
A new combined worker and connnunity right-to-know bill (SB 1670) has been
CMA 037968
i
introduced in New Jersey by Senator Dalton and hearings are expected in September.
CMA is working closely with the New Jersey Chemical Industry Council on their
development of appropriate comments and arguments for the upcoming debate.
An industry court challenge to West Virginia's 1981 worker right-to-know law
has been defeated.
Organized labor has made state right-to-know a priority issue for 1983. This
is evidencing itself in states like Michigan and Texas where rumours persist of
bills in preparation.
In order to meet this challenge, CMA is in the final stages
of preparing a comprehensive information packet on the right-to-know issue for use
in the states. This would supplement the issues analysis booklet which was made
available in late June.
HAZARDOUS WASTES
Hazardous waste continues .to be the most active state program area. The SASC
Hazardous Waste Disposal Task Group has been involved in the following activities:
Gearing up to address the impact in the states of the forthcoming
tort law study mandated under federal superfund.
Completion of the state by state data gathering effort on hazardous
waste.
Increased interaction with EMC task groups in policy development
and support activities for state activities.
Meeting with chemical industry and state association representatives
in Florida during June to discuss superfund developments as they
might impact that state.
The most significant legislative activity during the summer months was the
passage of a superfund bill by New York. The final bill was the product of intense
negotiations between industry and the state and between the Assembly and Senate.
The act creates a cleanup fund which is funded by a waste end fee. Third party
liability provisions were not included.
In Massachusetts, HB 6551 is likely to be considered this fall. Member
company representatives, working closely with ihe Associated Industries of
Massachusetts, have been engaged in discussions with the Administration, legislators
and environmental groups much of the year. The bill in its current form is bond
financed and contains no additional liability language.
Michigan HB 4715 has passed the House and is in the Senate pending further
action. Although the bill still requires further amendments to more closely link
it to federal superfund, it is financed from general revenues and does not contain
liability provisions.
The New Jersey Spill Fund will likely be the subject of significant amendments
this fall by Representative Lesniak. Of critical importance to the chemical industry
is the conversion of the tax from feedstock to waste end. The New Jersey CIC has
been working with Mr. Lesniak throughout the year on Spill Fund amendments.
CMA 037959
HA2ARP0US MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION
Progress has continued on drafting consensus "Good Samaritan" language
for use by a coalition of trade associations. CMA concerns center on language
to insure adequate immunity for companies responding to hazardous materials
incidents. Once consensus language has been achieved, targeting of states for
coalition action can begin in earnest. The SASC Hazardous Materials Transportation
Task Group is now working closely with Distribution Committee members to more
clearly delineate state transportation concerns and develop briefing materials
to support our positions.
j
j
i
j
i
f
j
State and Federal staff members of the CMA Government Relations Department
have been active in negotiations with other trade associations and state and local
organizations on the appropriate roles of federal, state and local government in
r gulating the transportation of hazardous materials.
Althought there has been-limited legislative or regulatory activity this year 1
on prenotification requirements for hazardous materials shipments, Alabama recently j
proposed regulations requiring two weeks prior notification of the shipment of
hazardous waste. This notification would be given to several state agencies and the ^
hazardous waste facility to which the waste is being shipped.
r
AIR AMD WATER QUALITY
j
The SASC Environmental Task Group has been reorganized under a new chairman
and has designated priority issues in the air and water quality area including:
Groundwater/safe drinking water, water quality standards (including permitting
limitations), pre-treatment, hazardous air pollutants, controlled trading, and
state cancer policies.
The task group is working with the £MC groundwater and water quality standards
task groups on developing state issue positions and supporting materials.
Major legislative and regulatory activity includes the California Air Resource
Board proposal to severely regulate both proven and suspected toxic air contaminants
California SB 1005 would legislatively limit and control their authority to regulati
in this area. Other states with toxic air contaminant legislation include
Louisiana, Illinois, Wyoming and Texas.
Michigan SB 600 would extend the life of the state TSCA act indefinitely.
I
Michigan is also working on developing risk assessment methodology for use in wattrl
quality standards.
I
CHA
CMA 037960
I
EXHIBIT M
REPORT OF DIRECTOR OF COMMUNICATIONS
RICHARD L. WILSON
INTRODUCTION;
The CMA Communications Department has one primary objective;
to increase recognition that the chemical industry is committed
to act responsibly to protect the public from the health and
safety risks of its products -- and thereby to develop public
support for the industry's public policy positions.
The depart­
ment is an integral part of the CMA umbrella function of advocacy.
CMA's communications activities are instrumental in shaping
public understanding and public support.
From this understanding
and support evolves government controls and issue-related laws
and regulations.
The department is interlocked with and suppor­
tive of every other CMA department and committee through every
step of the public policy process.
The CMA Communications Committee (made up of the top pro­
fessionals in the industry) monitors department activities and
helps in program development.
The comprehensive program includes:
ADVERTISING - The CMA two-year old advertising program produced
measurable results, as tested by Cambridge Reports in its third
wave public opinion poll earlier this year.
Almost half the
."political active" sample surveyed were aware of the CMA communi­
cation in the magazines in which the ads appeared.
Those aware
of the communications gave the industry better marks (13 percentage
points) for its efforts on waste disposal than those who were not.
For the first time since 1980, the proportion of politically
active individuals who feel the industry is concerned about the
average person's welfare (47%) nearly equals those viewing the
industry as unconcerned.
The current creative strategy -- to demonstrate the chemical
industry commitment through the personal concern of individual
industry people by showing their dual role as concerned parent and
worker -- will be used for the remainder of this calendar year.
These ten human-interest advertisements appear in Time, Newsweek,
U.S. News & World Report. Smithsonian, The New York Times. The Los
Angeles Times and The Washington Post.
In two years these ads have
generated almost a quarter of a million requests for the "key
issues" booklets and additional information.
Several new creative formats
ment beginning Jan. 1, 1983.
are being considered
for place-
CMA 037961
2
NEWS SERVICES - By the middle of September 1982 , members of CMA ' s
Science Advisory Group will visit 67 cities and appear on more
than 130 television and 105 radio programs and participate in
nearly 125. newspaper interviews.
The section is coordinating
an even more aggressive media tour schedule during the current
media tour "season."
Between June 1932 and May 1983, media
tour spokespersons should visit approximately 90 primary cities.
News materials distribution includes special newsfeatures and
opinion pieces for print media; issue backgrounders; special re­
ports from ChemEcology; news releases; booklets and pamphlets;
and distribution of "The Chemical Industry Facts File."
The Section has begun production of special communications
materials on such key issues as water and hazardous waste.
The
first of these was a package of materials on water issues, de­
signed for use or adaptions by member companies at the local level.
Included in this package were: a model speech and press release;
backgrounders on water issues; suggested questions and answers for
media interviews; video film clips.
Similar packages on other
issues -- including hazardous waste disposal -- are planned.
The Section will produce a special monthly newsletter to
member-company communication personnel tracking press comments
and reports on major issues.
Another newsletter is planned for
members of the press to keep them up to date on issues.
Radio operations include: THE REPORT, a series of threeminute newsfeatures, distributed biweekly to a 1,500-station
network.
Interview topics cover hazardous waste treatment, dis­
posal and siting, energy, clean air and water issues, and other
'chemical related subjects.
One-minute newsfceds with actuality
are done when immediacy is important.
Usage rates of 1,250 to
1,650 stations encourage an increased effort in the future.
In the television area: ninety-second newsfeatures were
produced this spring on Superfund and hazardous waste techno logy,
Initial distribution was done by satellite with followup pla cement
in 84 target markets.
More newsfeatures are planned for thi s fisca 1
year on energy, environmental and economic issues.
Media contact continues and will be expanded by attends nee at
the Radio and Television News Directors Association, Nations 1
Radio Broadcasters Association and National Farm Broadcaster s
Association conventions.
i
i
i
Also, News Services is responsible for coordinating sus tained,
day-to-day contact with all members of the press and eoordin ation
of placement and development efforts by CMA*s outside public relations counsel.
The Section's media contact efforts have resulted in numerous
television and radio interviews for CMA staff executives on each of
CMA 037962
i
3
the major commercial television networks,
and the Public Broadcasting System.
National
Public Radio
Ca 11s from the media to CMA average about 4,200 calls a year,
This fi gure does not include telephone and personal contacts
initiat ed by the Section.
In addition, the Section has undertaken a program to place
CMA off icers and executives on major speaking platforms in major
markets across the country, such as: the Detroit Economics Club;
the wor Id Affairs Council of Pittsburgh; the Executive Club of
I
Chicago *
SPECIAL PROJECTS - A pilot regional communications program is being
1aunehe d.
The program will be limited to one state, will be molded
to that state's communications needs and will be carried out by the
state c hemical industry council or its equivalent, along with the
support of the companies that make up the council.
Funds for the
program would be made available by CMA.
The purposes of the pilot
program are to measure the'effectiveness of the CMA communications
program in a concentrated area and to develop a model which other
states could use to attack their communications problems.
As of June, 1,080,000 key issue booklets have been printed, and
947,650 have been distributed.
Total leaflets printed were 1,472,700,
with 1,207,760 distributed.
Presentations on CMA's communications program were given to the
.public relations staff of Celanese Corporation, the Chemical Section
of the International Association of Business Communicators and the
Fairfield County, Greenwich, Conn., chapter of the Public Relations
Society of America.
Contact has been made with the public relations
committee of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, to enlist
AIChE members in CMA's communications effort.
The DuPont Company's introductory session for the CMA staff
training program was so successful that portions of the program
will be included in CMA's communications program.
This introductory session was shown to mid- and top-level
management at the Environmental Protection Agency in May.
Consumer Information: This Section is involved heavily in
organization liaison -- initiating, developing and maintaining
mutually beneficial relationships between CMA and a wide variety
of consumer, public interest, educational and other influential
organizations..
The Section pa rtieipated in the past ten annual conventions of
the American Women in Radio and Television (AWRT), with continuing
contact and serviei ng throughout the year.
CMA provides on-scene
TV and radio taping facilities for AWRT interviews with key member
company executives.
CMA 037963
4
Also, the Saction participated for the fourth year in
venture with the National Association of Farm Broadcasters
Twelve company executives gave 296 radio and TV interviews
and-a-half'days .
a similar
in two-
The program consistently exhibits at the national conventions
and works throughout the year with:
General Federation of Women's Clubs -- 12,500 U.S. clubs
and 600,000 members;
American Home Economics Association -- 55,000 members with
high concentration in academia;
National Association of Extension Home Economists -- 4,100
members who work with 58,000 clubs;
National Extension Homemakers Council -- 600,000 members;
American Council on Consumer Interests -- 4,300 members,
mainly consumer educators.
Education t The Catalyst Awards, begun in 1957, have honored
134 college, junior college'and high school teachers — a reservoir
of teachers supportive of the industry.
Presently, six national
and 12 regional awards are given each year.
National winners
receive $1,500, a medal and a certificate.
Begional winners
receive $500, a medal and a certificate.
The Chemical Industry
C uncils are tied closely to the high school award portion of
the program, which gives CMA a community base.
Over 1,000 requests
for information and nomination forms were received in 1982 result­
ing in 176 excellent candidates.
CMA has now begun its 1983
promotion throughout the United States and Canada.
AUDIO-VISUALS - "The Need to Know," a 27»j-minute film developed
in 1982 about hazardous waste disposal, is just beginning to be
distributed to organizations and schools.
Member companies
ordered 30 16 mm. versions and 63 videotapes of "The Need to
Also, CMA developed three public service announcements as
part of "The Need to Know" film package; "Abandoned Waste Sites,"
"Clean water in America" and "Waste Disposal -- Incineration."
More than 700 of these spots are being mailed to public service
directors around the country for use on cable and public television.
Quantities of each with script and storyboard have been reserved
for sale to members for hand placement to their local public
television stations.
"Doing Something," a 21-minute, 16 mm. film on the on-job
activities, of specialists in health and safety areas, has been
circulated'to 231 TV stations with 1,910,295 estimated viewers.
Since the beginning of promotion of the film, a total of 559
films have been circulated to 10,431,135 estimated viewers.
This year to date, 2,631 bookings have been scheduled to
community audiences with 169,024 estimated viewers. And a total of
7,146 bookings have been scheduled with 429,376 estimated viewers
CMA 037964
l
5
since distribution began in 1981.
Member companies have ordered
277 16 mm. versions and 63 videotapes of the film.
"The Chemical Balance" is a 12-minute, 35 mm. audio-visual
presentation of chemical industry contributions to people, the
nation and its management of risk.
A free copy of the slide show
was given to each member company.
PUBLICATIONS - CMA News strives to keep its 5,000 readers in
member companies informed of Association activities.
Increasingly,
the publication is going behind the news to explain the significance
of current issues.
During the past year, four-page backgrounders
have covered the CMA/EPA Five Plant Study, TSCA, the environmen­
talist movement and natural gas decontrol.
A quarterly report
summarizes CMA activities and future plans.
ChemEcology keeps important external publics informed about
the industry's efforts to improve the environment and the workplace.
Its 30,000 readers get the other side of the story that seldom
appears in the public media-.
Background papers are prepared on vital environmental issues
to keep the press and other interested publics aware of CMA' s
positions and progress.
Recent backgrounders explain CMA's posi­
tion on the need to update the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act.
CMA
CMA 037965
AGENDA
MEETING OF THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Monday and Tuesday, January 10 and 11, 1983
Morris Bakar Room, Ocean Reef Club
Kay Largo, Florida
Call to Order — Chairman Simeral
STANDING COMMITTEE CHAIRMEN REPORTS
Occupational Safety and Health Committee
Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee
Chairman: E. Hamilton Hurst, Nalco Chemical Company
4. Patent and Trademark Committee
Chairman: Roy H. Massengill, Allied Corporation
10:00-10:40
5. international Trade Committee
Chairman: Robert E. Lory, Exxon Chemical Company
10:40-11:20
6. Tax Policy Conmiittee
Chairman: Glenn W. white. The Dow Chemical Company
11:20-12:00
7. Communications Committee
Chairman: William M. Metten, Jr., ICI Americas Inc.
LUNCH (Ocean Room)
This Board meeting will continue Tuesday,
January 11, 1983, beginning at 9:00 a.m.
in the Morris Baker Room.
Next Meeting of the Board of Directors:
CMA Headquarters, Washington, D. C.
CMA 037966
Agenda -- Meecing of the CMA Board of Directors (continued)
Opening Remarks and Approval of Minutes of
October 5, 1983, Meeting — Chairman Simeral
Treasurer's Report -- G. C. Herman
Report of Executive Committee — Chairman Fernandez
Report of Nominating Committee — Chairman Simeral
Association Activities:
TAB
1
Report of the President — R. A. Roland
Report of Special Programs Advisory Committee —
Edward Callahan, Allied Corporation
2
I
10:15-10:20
Member Relations — V. H. Peterson
3
l
10:20-10:35
International Affairs Group — Etcyl H. Blair,
The Dow Chemical Company
4
10:35-10:50
Report of Technical Director — G. V. Cox
5
10:50-11:05
Report of Director of Government Relations —
6
11:05-11:20
Report Of Director of Communications — R. L. Wilson
7
11:20-11:35
Report of General Counsel — D. F. Zoll
8
I
I
I
I
11:35-11:45
New Business
11:45
Adjournment
l
I
CMA 037967
2201
MINUTES of the two-hundred ninety-first meeting of the Board of Directors of
the Chemical Manufacturers Association, Inc., held at the Ocean Reef Club,
Key Largo, Florida, on Monday at 8:00 a.m. and Tuesday at 9:00 a.m., January
Directors:
William G. Simeral, Chairman
Edwin C. Holmer, Vice Chairman
Paul F. Hoffman
Dexter F. Baker
Ray R. Irani
Raymond F. Bentele
A. Clark Johnson
Charles E. Brookes
John S. Ludington
Harry w. Buchanan
Dwight C. Minton
Carlyle G. Caldwell
Fred w. Montanari
Lester E. Coleman
Harry Corless
Toy F. Reid
Robert S. Dudley
Robert A. Roland
Louis Fernandez
David L. Rooke
John T. Files
M. Whitson Sadler
Alee Flamm
James F. Schorr
Joseph P. Flannery
A. L. Goeschel
Harold A. Sorgenti
Edward A. Von Doersten
Robert w. Gutheil
Konrad M. Weis
James B. Henderson (1)
William G. West
Secretary:
Treasurer:
General Counsel:
Bruce M. Barackman
Gary C. Herrman
David F. Zoll
By Invitation:
Stuart T. Allen, SOCMA, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
E. H, Blair, The Dow Chemical Company (1)
Jackson B. Browning, Union Carbide Corporation (2)
Edward W. Callahan, Allied Corporation (1)
Geraldine V. Cox, CMA
Robert E. Hampton, ICI Americas Inc.
E. Hamilton Hurst, Nalco Chemical Company (1)
Robert E. Lory, Exxon Chemical Company (1)
Roy H. Massengill, Allied Corporation (1)
William M. Metten, Jr., ICI Americas Inc.
Victor H. Peterson, CMA
James H. Senger, Monsanto Company
william M. Stover, CMA
Glenn w. White, The Dow Chemical Company (1)
Richard L. Wilson, CMA
(1) first day only
(2) second day only
CMA 037968
2202
Monday, January 10, 1983
The meeting was called to order by Chairman Simeral.
STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTS
Executive summaries are attached in lieu of
the complete committee reports which have
been previously distributed to the Board.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with chairman Ryan's report, is
attached as Exhibit A.
CHEMICAL REGULATIONS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with chairman Hurst's report, is
attached as Exhibit B.
PATENT AND TRADEMARK COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with chairman Massengill's report,
is attached as Exhibit C.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with chairman Lory's report, is
attached as Exhibit D.
TAX POLICY COMMITTEE
The committee report, supplemented with chairman White's report, is
attached as Exhibit E.
COMMUNICATIONS COMMITTEE
The consnittee report, supplemented with chairman Metten's report, is
attached as Exhibit F.
ADDITIONAL REPORTS
The two reports following were moved forward from
the Board agenda for Tuesday, January 11, 1983.
SPECIAL PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Chairman Callahan distributed to those present a revised SPAC charter,
Exhibit G, to replace the one contained in Appendix 1, page 5, of the com­
mittee report previously circulated to the Board. This, along with certain
CMA 037969
2203
other items, will be presented to the Executive Committee for approval.
He emphasized that the chemical-specific programs conducted by the com­
mittee perform front line service for the industry in addressing product, en­
vironmental, and worker safety issues and their relationship to government
relations.
Referring to various handouts, he then described the several roles of
the committee as contained in the "Purpose" section of the charter; briefly
discussed the reorganization of SPAC; and concluded with an overview of its
future activities.
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS GROUP
Dr. Blair expanded on his report, Exhibit H, by reviewing the origin
and history of I AG and discussing the various problems being addressed by the
group on behalf of the U.S. chemical industry. He concluded with a plea for
Board support for IAG activities which can have a major impact on the inter­
national movement of chemical substances, and will require, on occasion, the
presence of IAG representatives in other parts of the world.
The Board adjourned until 9:00 a.m., Tuesday, January 11.
Tuesday, January 11, 1983
MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
The minutes of the October 5, 1982, Board meeting were approved as
distributed.
TREASURER'S REPORT
Mr. Herrman's report is attached as Exhibit I.
Additionally, he advised
that:
e
Current year expenses continue to be controlled at or below the
level in the reduced operating budget.
e
The communications assessment, reduced to the 20% level, was
mailed the first of December. Through January 5, 1983, pay­
ments have been received from 107 of our 181 members totalling
$975,000. Dues will be slightly above budget since we have re­
ceived payments from two members whose payments were in doubt at
the time the amended budget and contingency plan were prepared.
e
Returns in response to the October preliminary survey of calendar
year 1982 sales indicated that CMA dues would be down by 5-6%
which is the amount estimated in the contingency plan.
CMA 037970
2204
The request for actual calendar year 1982 sales has been mailed.
The return of this information at the earliest possible date
would be appreciated. The preliminary budget should be mailed
to the Finance and Executive Committees about February 21 for
review at the March 7 and 8 meetings. The Board will be asked
to review and approve a proposed budget and funding at the April 5
meeting.
REPORT OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Chairman Fernandez reported the following matters taken up by the Execu­
tive Committee the preceding day:
e
Special Programs Advisory Committee
Accepted the recommendations
of the Special Programs Committee that: the existence of SPAC be ex­
tended for a year, Exhibit J; the modified committee charter, Ex­
hibit G, distributed to the Board at its previous session, be approved
as proposed; and the proposed program on alkanolamines, Exhibit K,
be approved. The proposed name change for the Biomedical and Environ­
mental Special Programs Division was not accepted.
e
Hazardous Waste Management
Heard a presentation of a proposed
long-range plan by the Hazardous Haste Strategy Group on which the
chairmen of CMA's Environmental Management, Communications, and Govern­
ment Relations Committees serve. The program's objective is to turn,
the negative public perception to a more favorable view of the way the
chemical industry is handling waste management. Each member of the
Executive committee, following his company's study of the plan, will
respond to Mr. Roland. The HWSG, after being informed of the views of
the Executive Committee, will then submit for the latter's further
consideration a set of specific proposals.
e
Public Compensation
Heard a presentation on the public compensation issue by the Strategic Options Work Group and the Data Develop­
ment work Group. It was decided to continue the existence of the SOWS,
augmented with additional skills. The DDWG will be placed on hold and
the chairman, Dr. Karrh will be added to the SOWG. Data collection
will be suspended pending a resolution of specific strategy alternatives
to be prepared, not later than the end of February, for Executive Com­
mittee consideration.
i
Meanwhile it was agreed that it was appropriate for CMA to: support
the Kasten bill which would strengthen the present tort system; not
support the asbestos bill and work to eliminate the provision permit­
ting inclusion of the chemical industry;
press EPA to develop the
data base that would scope the dimensions of the health problem which
may be related to waste disposal sites; and build coalitions with
other organizations and industry groups.
In order to position ourselves more effectively to address not only the
public compensation issue but also ocher issues which may arise in the
Congress, Mr. Rooke was appointed to coordinate efforts, working with
the CMA Government Relations Committee and staff, to establish an in­
dustry-wide grassroots network.
CMA 037971
2205
Recognizing the importance of speaking with a united voice the attached
statement, Exhibit L, prepared at the direction of the Executive Com­
mittee was distributed to those present for use in responding to questions
regarding the CMA position on public compensation.
RESIGNATION OF DIRECTOR
Chairman Simeral announced the resignation of Mr. Orell T. Collins,
Director of the Association, effective November 17, 1982.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded,
it was
VOTED: That H. H. Clark, President,
CEO, Nalco Chemical Company, be elected
to fill the vacancy on the Board and the
Finance Committee through May 31, 1983.
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES
Report of the President
e
Mr. Roland reviewed the budget process at CMA; the development
of a system of prioritization which has identified about 12 major
issue areas within which the Association operates; and the attempt
which will be made to overlay this on the budget process for fiscal
year 1983-84.
e
Because CMA's allocation of guaranteed spaces for the Annual Meet­
ing at The Greenbrier, June 9-10, has been reduced by 100 from last
year, all member companies are urged to register as soon as possible.
The cutoff date for registrations is April 1.
e
The Board meeting next following the Annual Meeting is September
12-13 at the Cloister, Sea Island Georgia. The Semiannual Meet­
ing is in New York City at the New York Hilton Hotel November 7-8.
Member Relations
Mr. Peterson's report is attached as Exhibit M. Distributed to
those present as a matter of information were copies of a survey
of chemical industry participation in state CICs and the Local
Leadership Newsletter which reports the activities of state organi­
zations .
Report of Technical Director
In expanding on her report, Exhibit N, Dr. Cox highlighted the
advocacy CMA is pursuing with other organizations on environmental
matters. She urged that company people be encouraged to join local
conservation groups so that the facts can be brought to light and
thereby promote a better understanding and establish a more balanced
public view of environmental issues.
CMA 037972
2206
Report of Director of Government Relations
Mr. Stover's report is attached as Exhibit 0.
Report of Director of Communications
Expanding on his report, Exhibit P, Mr. Wilson advised that CMA
is m search of positive, dramatic, human interest stories from
the chemical industry that could be developed into television
scripts. He distributed to those present a flyer outlining this
project and solicited special storylines.
During discussion following Mr. Wilson's report, Mr. Sella emphasized
the importance of stockholders as a key public for CMA's communica­
tions program. Alluding to several million who could be reached in
this manner, he volunteered to work with CMA staff in organizing a
program to urge member company decision makers to undertake stock­
holder mailings.
Report of General. Counsel
Mr. Zoll's report is attached as Exhibit Q.
Bruce M. Barackman
Vice President-Secretary
Certified correct:
William G. Simeral
Chairman of the Board
CMA 037973
exhibit a
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
CMA's Occupational Safety and Haalth Committee (OSHC) has
baan charged by the Board of Directors to develop and recom­
mend policies on occupational health, slant safety, fire pro­
tection and precautionary labeling.
Committee and task group
members participated in a debate on health and safety issues
affecting the chemical Industry.
During the past year, the committee met its goals on ma­
jor regulatory proposals; educated the Occupational Safety and
Health Adminatration (OSHA) in health and safety regulatory
reform; publicised responsible workplace practices employed
throughout our industry; participated in voluntary standard­
setting organisations; and worked with congressional staff on
issues of concern to the legislature.
Some major accomplish­
ments of particular note include;
e
Convincing OSHA that its labeling objectives could be
met through effective hasard communications programs
already in use.
The current regulation is a signifi­
cant savings over the $14 billion estimated to be the
cost for chemical industry compliance with a labeling
rule proposed by the last OSHA administration.
e
"Selling" OSHA on use of balanced-performance stand­
ards.
The committee drafted a model standard on
hasardous materials demonstrating these principles.
The committee also sponsored a seminar for a large
group of Agency standard writers on how to prepare
performance standards.
e
Participating actively in the revision of the Agency's
carcinogen policy, through written and oral presenta­
tions to OSHA.
Its advocacy of sound proposals on health and safety
matters won the committee professional respect and rapport
among OSHA policymakers.
This relationship has been built on
solid and timely responses to the Agency's questions and
requests.
By maintaining the Agency's respect and confidence,
OSHC has been able to provide insight and important industry
perspective to the OSHA Adminatration as it develops regula­
tory proposals.
While occupational health issues receive much of the hype
and attention devoted to workplace practices, safety issu s
represent a substantial component of OSHA's regulatory pr gram.
During the past year, the OSHC advocacy program on
workplace safety was expanded to balance its health issues
programs.
The committee w rked with OSHA to devel p a tar­
geted safety inspect! ns proposal, and bolstered th
position
CMA 037974
2
through additional eoananta.
Noise, hazardous saterials and
sarin* tarminals art axaspl*# of oth«r safety issu* proposals
for which CMA provided consents.
tinually looking for ways to inprov* congressional and Dubllc
understanding of praetiees and controls used throughout indus­
try to alnlaiz* risks in tha workplace.
The coaaitte* worked
with CMA's Sovernaent Relations Departaent to provide the
Association's views on key issues, including hazard coeauaicatlons and cytogenetic screening, to congressional eonaittees
with jurisdiction over OSSA.
The coaaittee's work with CMA's
Coaaunlcatloas's Departaent has been directed toward iaproving
public perception of workplace hazards in the ehealcal indus­
try.
Its views on subjects such as hazard coaaunieations.
cancer, and reproductive hazards provide balance to health and
safety probleas elained by labor and public interest groups.
The ehealcal industry's safety record — tops by the Rational
Safety Council -- serves as a vehicle to carry our views on
specific regulatory and legislative interests.
During the coning year, OSHC will further strengthen both
its health and safety advocacy prograas.
Several key OSHA
proposals aust becoae final rules if gains froa th* work of
th* past year are to be realized.
The coaaitte* will work
with OSRA to ensure these gains,
when anticipated regulations
aatur* as proposed rules, the coaaitte* will analyse thea and
suggest reasonable alternatives where appropriate.
Congress is ezpected to appropriate funds for th* Occupa­
tional Safety and Health Act in 1983.
The OSHC will bg. pre­
pared for any pressure to asend th* Act in a way that will
sake compliance sore burdensoae.
Additionally, states will be
reviewing the adecuacv of state health and safety laws,
in
response, OSHC will continue to assist CMA's Oovernaent Rela­
tions Departaent by providing advocacy aaterials to state
industry groups.
To aoet these challenges, the eoanitte* will look for th*
continued strong support it has received froa CMA aeabers and
staff la th* past.
It will rely upon its chief asset — its
dedicated aeabers and task groups — to aeeoaplish the objec­
tives and fulfill the- needs of our industry in having reason­
able controls on workplace practices.
CMA
CMA 037976
remarks to cma board of directors
Chairman, Occupational Safety and Health Committee
January 10, 1983
During the years 1980 and 81, and 1981-82, under the leadership of Tom
Evans, the OSH Committee of CMA was re-organized, re-energized, and became
recognized by government agencies as a force for industry representation
and cooperative effort. With this as a foundation we decided to look at the
tasks for the year 1982-83. He decided that, initially, we should re-evaluate
the current OSHA administration's attitude, establish cooperative, nonduplicative efforts with other inter-industry groups, establish strong communica­
tions with other CMA committees whose work overlapped and influenced ours, and
consolidate and/or eliminate task groups where feasible.
The attitude of the current OSHA administration was succinctly made clear
to us by a communication which we received from Mark Cowan, the then-Deputy
Assistant Secretary for OSHA. He said, "...After years of stating that industry
if given the opportunity is well equipped to address workplace problems, industry
now, in the OSHA area has an opportunity which may never again be repeated. The
opportunity exists for corporate America to double and re-double their efforts
in this field so as to prove it can be done without undue government interference.
The chance to demonstrate conclusively that companies sincerely care about their
workforce is available. Should this opportunity be missed, or worse, should
corporations through a de-emphasis of safety and health programs give credence
to the allegation that the only concern in the boardroom is profit, the old OSHA
of days past will rise from the grave with a vengeance. Now is not the time for
corporations to let down their guard nor to relax measures which have resulted in
gains in the safety and health area."
He believe that this gives us a clear indication that the current OSHA
administration will continue in the vein that they have been and that they are
open for cooperative efforts from industry groups.
He are redoubling our efforts to establish closer and more efficient coopera­
tion with a number of industry groups. Since numbers of our health and safety
people serve on task forces with diverse organizations, we're attempting to determine
who should have the lead role in responding to individual OSHA regulations in an
effort to minimize the time, travel and effort required of the members of your
company on these various committees. The organization deemed most appropriate to
prepare the primary response does so; the other organizations then adapt the response
to their needs.
He are in the process of eliminating some task groups and consolidating others
and will reduce the number of task groups from 12 to 6 or 7 in an effort to stream­
line the work of the OSH com&ittee and again reduce the time and travel required
by task group members. However, major efforts will continue in the area of
carcinogens, reproductive hazards, respirators, targeting health inspections,
industrial noise, performance standards, and hazards connunications, federal and
and state and consunity.
CMA 037976
2
We have been involved with a number of activities with the government
agencies involved with health and safety matters, a major theme which runs
throughout our responses and testimony related to all OSHA standards and
regulations is the theme. Performance Standards. We are constantly advising
OSHA to write their standards with the goals and objectives desired, the
general processes and/or strategy, including work practices to reach the
goal, and to minimize the specifications in the materials and equipment.
A major effort has been carried out by the Safety Standards Group in
this area. They have written a model standard for hazardous substances in the
workplace in performance language. At the request of the Assistant Secretary
for OSHA they have used this document in a training session for standards writers
in an effort to educate them in the writing of performance standards. This has
been well received by OSHA and the task group has received a letter of thanks
from the Director of OSHA for their activity. It is our hope that with this
training effort and interaction with OSHA, the new standards will be written
in true performance language.
Another significant work effort with OSHA has led to the adoption of the
Safety Inspection Targeting System for Routine Safety inspections. This enables
OSHA to focus their inspections on high-hazard industries where they'll do the
most good, and enables those of us with good safety records to be free of routine
safety inspections.
Work is ongoing to apply a similar methodology for health inspections, and_
recently two of our members attended an OSHA workshop where an effort was being
made to devise such a method. The method recommended by the CMA members appears
to have been favorably received by other members of industry, the unions, and
the governmental agencies. We shall continue with efforts in this area over the
near future.
Another major effort was carried out on the standard for hazards communica­
tion. This culminated in testimony by a four-member panel of CMA on June 17, 1982.
/3ur work in this area was completed when post-hearing comments were filed in
September, 1982. As stated previously, we're hopeful that a federal standard in
this area will reempt a myriad of state standards which currently exist from
being enforced and also prevent the writing of standards by states and communities
which have not yet done so.
We presented the argument that OSHA has the authority to preempt states
standards with a federal standard on the basis that a myriad of state standards
will present an undue burden on interstate commerce.
This brings me to the area of States Activities Task Group which is doing
yeoman work to track and respond to an increasing number of state and local initia­
tives dealing with hazardous substances under worker "right to know” and community
"right to know” statutes. It is not clear whether the promulgation of a federal
hazardous communication standard will supersede the current states statutes but
the minimum we hope to achieve is to reduce the proliferation of further state
and community statutes in this area. It is worthy of note that the State of
California has already announced their position that there is no Federal override
so long as the state statute is "as stringent as" the federal. Further, although
the federal statute may affect "worker right to know" laws from proliferating
we are unsure as to what effect it will have on "community right to know" standards.
Considerable work remains to be done in this area in conjunction with the
legislative affairs committee.
CMA 037977
The issue of "managing reproductive risk in the workplace" deserves some
comment. The reproductive risk issue continues to be active with legislators
and in the news media. As you are probably aware, a recent court decision in the
"Olin case"upheld the concept that prohibiting a fertile female from working in
an evnironment which is harmful to the fetus does not constitute discrimination
on the basis of sex, but is a legitimate work practice. C.M.A. has had a lead
position on this issue for some time and the OSH Committee will be conducting
a conference on "Managing Reproductive Risk in the Workplace" on May 11 and 12,
1983. It will focus on a review of the most recent information in this field
with emphasis on how various companies are addressing it. Attendees will be
restricted to C.M.A. members from various line and staff disciplines.
In the latter half of 1983, conferences will be conducted on "Worker Educatiorf'
and on "Process Safety Analysis".
In addressing the future the committee determined that it needed a better
mechanism for "picking and choosing" from the myriad of issues which ones it
should most appropriately address. In an effort to do this, we determined that
we would look at the issues presented to us from the viewpoint of the likelihood
of their occurrence and their potential impact on CMA member companies, issu s
will be submitted to the OSH Committee by the redesigned Future Issues Task
Group, members of the committee, and the general membership of CMA.
in conclusion, the OSH Committee recognizes that the problem of worker,
community and product liability which is currently being addressed by the
Executive Committee will be a very significant issue for federal and state
legislators for some time to come, and will be intertwined with hazardous
substances communication, worker "right to know" and community "right to know"
regulations.
CMA
CMA 037978
exhibit b
CHEMICAL REGULATIONS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Th« Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee (CRAC) has
developed policies on governmental control of chemicals at the
point of manufacture primarily by guiding SPA's implementation
of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).
TSCA is compre­
hensive and significantly affects not only our industry, but
also parts of society dependent on chemical products.
The
Act's pervasive impact, therefore, makes effective implementa­
tion a key to managing the regulatory burden on the production
of chemical products.
Since TSCA was enacted in 1 976, CRAC
has guided EPA's implementation of the Act mainly bv comment­
ing on, or proposing major rules.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) implemented
very little of the Act before 1981.
However, because of the
industry's persistent interaction with EPA, many reasonable
procrams are now in place or have been proposed.
For example,
several final rules on existing chemicals are considerably
less burdensome then they might have been without CRAC's ef­
forts; negotiated voluntary tasting is a reality; the premanu^
facture notification (PMN) program is functioning well with
many PMNs filed on CMA's PMN form, and SPA has proposed a PMN
exemption program for certain chemicals -- largely in response*
to a CMA petition.
Future CMA concerns should focus on how the remaining
sections of TSCA are implemented.
For example, the chemical
industry needs to work closely with EPA to ensure that the
Agency's follow-up programs on new and existing chemicals are
implemented soundly.
The next 12 months will be a momentous period for CRAC.
Me have received many signals that TSCA reauthorisation and
oversight activities will be particularly challenging.
ready, public interest groups, such as the Natural Resources
Defense Council, have announced they will push to amend TSCA
so that it will require base set testing of chemieals.
It is
paramount that CMA be aware of and effectively deal with both
national and international attempts to modify the Act.
If the
chemical industry plans to survive these uncertain economic
times and flourish in the future, TSCA must be implemented and
administered fairly and reasonably.
we must he prepared to
meet any challenge that would create additional, and unneces­
sarily burdensome requirements.
To prepare for those critical activities, CRAC initiated a
survey to assess what the. industry has done and is doing to
reduce unreasonable risks to health and the environment.
CRAC
plans to use the survey information in the reauthorixation and
CMA 037979
2
oversight hearings and la aupportinc CMA'* positions on rea­
sonable control of chaaicala.
The Information should also b«
valuable in supporting othsr CMA advoaacy programs on
environmental issues.
CRAC is committed to representing CMA's interests to spa as it
implements the remaining sections of T3CA, and to work with
the Agency now and la the future as it administers the law.
Furthermore CRAC is prepared to dewote its attention and
resources beyond TSCA, as neoessary* to moot the board's
purpose*
CMA
CMA 037980
remarks to cma board of directors
By E. Hamilton Hurst
Chairman, Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee
January 10, 1983
It seems like only a few months ago, I had the pleasure of addressing this
group to outline the activities of your Chemical Regulation Advisory Committee
(CRAC). In the interim, we have had a busy but a very productive year. I am
pleased to be here once again to highlight for you what has taken place and
to outline our plans for the coming year.
In your pre-meeting books, you will find a detailed summary of our activities.
This has been prepared by the CMA staff which has been of great assistance to
us throughout the year. Z will not cover all of the items included in this
summary as I want to spend my time here discussing the major events and our
future activities.
There are a few key events that did take place over the last 12 months which
deserve a quick highlight. When we talked last, the EPA had, frankly, imple­
mented only a portion of what TSCA will ultimately be. There was much crit­
icism of the Agency's failure to implement TSCA. The events of 1982 have
changed that and a great portion of the proposed rules have been finalized
and put into place.
Reporting Requirements of TSCA
Production, use and exposure data were required on 250' chemicals
by November, 1982.
Health and safety studies were required on 168 chemicals by
December, 1982.
Testing
For 1982, the court mandated a schedule for EPA to respond with a
decision to test or not to test 13 XTC-designated chemicals, the
EFA has made those decisions in 11 cases with 2 others imminent.
In addition to the court ordered schedule, EPA has made decisions
on 8 other ITC-designated chemicals.
Chemical Control
Rules for regulating PCB's in electrical equipment and excluding
CMA 037981
some closed or controlled waste manufacturing systems were
finalized. A third PCB regulation (scheduled now for December,
1983) will address all other processes which generate incidental
New Chemicals
Some 2,000 new chemicals have gone through the PMN process with
only a handful being regulated. The SPA reports that approxi­
mately 50% of the PMN's are of such low risk that they can
complete this review in about 15 days. Only 3% warrant extensive
review exceeding 45 days time, less than 1% have resulted in
either SPA orders or were withdrawn by the submitter because of
questions on risks associated with the chemical. The Agency has
responded to CMA's petition to exempt certain small-volume chem­
icals, site-limited intermediates and polymers from full PMN
review. Based on results of their PMN review experiences, EPA
proposed exemption rules in August, 1982 which should finalize
by mid-year 1983.
Since the events I have outlined are EPA actions and regulations at that, you
might reasonably ask — "Well, what has CRAC done to earn our pay — the EPA
seems to have done all the work — and what we have gotten are regulations."
I can proudly say — we have done a lot. CMA has had major impact in each
of these areas....to our industry's benefit.
In the Reporting Area
For production, use and exposure data reporting, the original EPA
proposals covered 2,300 chemicals - about 10 times what was covered
in the final rule. CMA was successful in convincing EPA they should
ask only for the amount of data they could reasonably handle and
digest on a current basis. We were able to avoid data gathering
for data gathering's sake.
The Health and Safety Data
in the finalization of these rules, we were successful in reducing
the amount of data to be submitted, we were able to shorten the
historical time period for which each company must review their
records and submit data.
Testing
In the testing area, production, use and test data information
CMA 037982
input from the individual companies has resulted in a number of
decisions by the EPA to not require testing of ITC-designated
chemicals. In other instances, companies have been able to use
"negotiations" to reach agreement with the Agency on what testing
is most reasonably required. CRAC has promoted the acceptance of
the "negotiated testing" concept as a practical substitute for
formal "test rules" under TSCA. Negotiated test agreements save
our resources and result in testing programs which focus only on
the most significant needs.
New Chemicals
The experience EPA has now achieved from processing 2,000+ PMN's,
has allowed us to isolate facts from this data to demonstrate and
convince the EPA that exemptions to the PMN system were needed,
justified and would help both industry and the Agency. While the
Agency would always like to have more information and test data
submitted on the PMN, they have developed review procedures using
PMN information and structural- similarity studies with which they
are satisfied they can carry out their responsibilities for PMN
review under TSCA, It was very refreshing to hear an EPA spokesman
at a recent presentation of their PMN system remark — "We recog­
nize that the PMN can be a terrible burden on new product innova­
tion. There is no way we should expect the development of complete
test data on each new chemical at this stage of their development,
nor do we need it to make the assessments required by TSCA." - Here
again, the EPA has heard us, We've come a long way baby! at least
with TSCA. The EPA is getting practical.
While we have our successes, we still have some major obstacles in front of
us an important priorities for 1983.
Oversight hearings - scheduled for early 1983.
Final PMN rules - scheduled by the second quarter.
Final PMN exemption rules - scheduled by the third quarter.
The development of EPA's approach to assign priority to and to regulate
existing chemicals.
These forthcoming events dictate our immediate plans for the future and it will
require our close attention to solidify our present gains and to continue the
implementation of TSCA as a workable law.
The most significant of our future activities is also the one we have to tackle
CMA 037983
first — the oversight hearings. While I had a rather uneventful experi­
ence of testifying before a Senate Subcommitte on Toxic Substances and
Environmental Oversight back in August of 1982, the real game will be
played early this Spring, perhaps in February or March in both the House
and the Senate.
we expect the oversight hearings to be particularly tough as our opponents
seek to turn around some of the successes we have achieved. Specifically,
in the House before Congressman Florio's Subcommittee we expect to see the
following issues to be pushed by the Environmentalists..
TSCA should be amended to require testing of new chemicals
since industry is providing test data in less than 50% of
the cases.
The Agency should not be allowed to accept negotiated testing
agreements as a substitute for test rules since these agreements
are unenforceable.
The ability of the Agency to regulate chemicals under TSCA is
constrained by the need to balance risks and benefits and make
findings of unreasonable risk. This requires that TSCA be
amended to reduce these constraints.
The environmentalists have indicated they intend to open TSCA for amend­
ments and we believe Congressman Plorio will be willing to listen. Congress
man Florio has already commissioned OTA (Office of Technology Assessment U.S. Congress) to make a study on the adequacy of data submitted on a PMJ.
'In addition, he commissioned the GAO (General Accounting Office) to study
EPA's PMN review process to include procedural and policy differences
between EPA's and EEC's approach. The Senate has commissioned GAO (General
Accounting Office to study the merits of negotiated testing versus testing
rules.
So, our work is cut out for us, within CRAC we have established an Ad Hoc
Oversight Committee chaired by myself with Carl Umland of Exxon as ViceChairman. This consul ttee, made up of our task group chairman and coordi­
nated with the Government Relations Committee through our "Key man,"
Jerry Kinney of Onion Carbide, is preparing position papers on these issues
and others. We plan to enlist the help of our friends on the House Sub­
committee to counter the environmental leanings of Congressman Florio and
others on the committee. We will welcome any and all help we can get as
we enter this oversight activity. Our objective is to avoid damaging
amendments to TSCA.
While we expect our major confrontation with the environmentalists will be
in the House, the climate in the Senate is also not the most desirable.
Though the Senate Subcommittee is controlled by Republicans, the specific
members have environmental interests and we will again need to be well
prepared.
As part of our preparation for oversight, and for use in other public arenas,
we are completing our survey on "chemical company activity to reduce unrea­
sonable risk." This survey, which your executive committee approved at our
Fall meeting in Chicago should provide valuable information for use at the
hearings to demonstrate that industry on its own has taken the action needed
to reduce unreasonable risks and that the "Spirit of TSCA" is working.
Furthermore, the data should help us indicate that significant changes to the
law are unnecessary.
We have over 100 companies participating in the survey so we believe the
results will be creditable. Initial results appear to be following the
pattern seen in the pilot survey which we completed early in 1982. The
companies have sent in their responses and our contractor is tabulating the
information for us now. We expect to have an initial tabulation of the
results by January 19th for our review. Of course we will forward a copy
of the results of this survey to you prior to announcing it to the public.
We expect we will be ready for public release around February 1st.
Getting back to the regulatory side of our operations, the Agency has
announced they intend to publish final PMN rules by April, 1983 and are
preparing an active follow-up program for certain new chemicals. We have
reason to believe the Agency has again heard us and will "back off" from
the extensive PMN forms originally proposed. While we have urged the Agency
not to adopt a "form," we expect they will require one to encourage consis­
tency and organization of the PMN data. We will be endeavoring to again
provide impact in the development of the final form.
We expect to follow-up activity will be based upon the implementation of
Significant New Use Rules (SNURS) and the various reporting rules for
chemicals in commercial production. We could see some of these follow-up
programs early this year. We expect these will be used in only a handful
of cases but we are actively working to assure the criteria used to initiate
this activities are acceptable.
The PMN exemption proposal put forth by the EPA follows, for the most part,
the concepts offered by CMA in its petition. Where the Agency has proposed
more extensive and burdensome approaches, we have reacted through comments,
testimony and face-to-faee discussion to offer alternatives which will
achieve the EPA's and industry's goals. We expect final rules on exemptions
by mid-year and our New Chemial Task Group now chaired by Jerry Hapka of
DuPont will be working to bring these to fruition.
CMA 037985
The last major regulatory objective under TSCA will be the establishment
of proper criteria to select and give priority to those chemicals which
may become the subject of regulation. This is a part of TSCA under which
the Agency is still under criticism since there have been no final rules
regulating chemicals under TSCA other than PCS's which was written into
the Act itself. The Agency is working to develop a process for existing
chemicals now. Zn the past year we established under CRAC a new task group
chaired by Fred Hoerger of Dow to work with the SPA on this process develop­
ment. There are 3 or 4 chemicals that SPA is now reviewing and we could
expect one or more of these to be the subject of proposed rules by the end
of 1983 or early 1984 controlling some aspects of production, processing,
distribution, use or disposal. He believe we are in a position to make this
process a reasonable one as it is developed.
In summary, 1982 saw major advances in the implementation of TSCA and major
progress on the part of the EPA in making the final rules and procedures
much more reasonable. CRAC, through its 15 active members and the excellent
CMA staff support we have received, has been instrumental in achieving this.
We said last year that a window existed with this Administration to make
significant advances in implementing TSCA in a reasonstie way. we have gotten
number of rules through that window.'
1983 will present new challenges, the most critical of which Will be our
oversight hearings where we must hold our ground and solidify the gains we
have made. We still believe TSCA is a workable law when implemented in a
reasonable and timely fashion. We will need to demonstrate that it is
working and that the goals of TSCA to reduce unreasonable risk are being
achieved. We will not seek to reopen TSCA for asiendment, however, should this
occur, we are prepared to offer our suggested improvements.
I have had the pleasure of chairing the CRAC Comittee for the past year and a
half and will complete this assignment and my fourth year of CRAC membership
in June. I thank you for the support you have given to your committee and to
me personally. The work of CRAC was needed. CRAC has been and continues to
be effective in achieving industry's goals to make TSCA a workable law as it
is implemented.
CMA
CMA 037986
EXHIBIT C
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In 1982/ CMA, through the Patent and Trademark Committee (PATC), has been
an instrumental voice in providing industry input to the U.S. Government m the
development of its patent policies at home and abroad- The PATC has also
advocated CMA positions, as appropriate, directly with foreign authorities.
During the past year, CMA, through the PATC, has obtained increased
visibility and respect in the industrial property rights area. Congressional
and Agency staff persons solicit CMA's comments on pending domestic legis­
lation, anticipated regulatory changes, and international negotiations.
Committee members, in addition to preparing written comments for submission
by CMA, have, for example, testified before the Patent and Trademark Office
on a proposed rulemaking and have served as industry advisors to the Diplomatic
Conferences held this year in Geneva, Switzerland on proposed revisions
to the international treaty on industrial property rights (commonly known as
the "Paris Convention"). In all these forums, the Committee has stressed
the importance of strengthened patent protection to technological advancement
and economic recovery.
And, perhaps as significant in this time of economic difficulties, the
Patent and Trademark Committee has fulfilled its 1982 activities with almost
no expenditures for outside assistance, either technical or legal. With
one minor exception, all written comments were prepared and advocacy activities
carried out by Committee members, other designated CMA member company
representatives, and CMA staff. We also do not anticipate any major outside
assistance expenses curing 1983.
Finally, the PATC believes that an important part of its role lies in
communication with all CMA member companies, both through the CMA Board
of Directors and through other member company representatives, on develop­
ments in the industrial property rights area. We, therefore, work to
increase awareness of the importance of these issues among member companies
and, in return, to obtain an understanding of member company positions on
these issues. Armed with this information, the Committee is able to
formulate proposed CMA positions for Board approval. In this communications
role in 1982, the PATC has informed the Board of a number of patent issues,
including Paris Convention developments; has held an open Committee meeting;
and has communicated with member companies through such mechanisms as Action
Advisories and newsletters.
This Executive Summary has been excerpted from page two of the following
Report, the section entitled "Patent and Trademark Committee Activities and
Accomplishments, Overview." .
i
CMA
CMA 037987
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
By Roy H. Massengill
Chairman, Patent and Trademark Committee
January 10, 1983
The year 1982 has marked three major milestones in the reform and
improvement of the patent system better to meet the needs of fostering techno­
logical progress. Procedures are now in place to obtain a higher quality patent
before issuance, to obtain less costly determinations of patent validity
without expensive litigation and to obtain more certain application of the
patent laws in litigation. Progress has been more difficult in changing the
substantive law to restore a full patent term for products whose introduction
has been subject to regulatory delay. Unfavorable changes in domestic federal
law to regulate contracts with employed inventors have been averted, so far.
Attempts by developing countries to force early consulsory licensing or can­
cellation of patents have also been put off, so far. The year 1983 will bring
renewed discussion on all three of these substantive matters: patent
term restoration, employed inventors contracts, and compulsory licensing of
patents in third world countries. It will also bring, we hope, renewed
discussion of two changes in the substantive U.S. patent law regarding inter­
national trade, and renewed discussion about interference practice, inventorship
in the corporate setting and other matters. Your CMA Patent and Trademark
Committee will work to help formulate and enunciate CMA policy on these issues
and to communicate with CMA member companies on developments in these areas.
I. PATENT REFORM
A. Examination. Many cospanies can expect patent costs to go up next
year because of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) fee increases,
effective October 1, 1982, that represent the first fee increase in almost
20 years. In combination with new management at the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office, the hiring of more Examiners, better Examiner training, better main­
tenance of the search files and an overdue trial of automated searching,
these fees will, we hope, bring a steady improvement in the system under
which patents are granted and trademarks are registered in the U.S. We
expect several procedural changes to be discussed next year that will enable
the additional resources to be used to shorten the period it takes to
issue a patent or register a trademark, while reducing the proportion that
are issued improperly because of such curable errors as prior art references
missing from the patent examiner's search file.
B. Alternative to Litigation. The reexamination system now in place is
designed to provide a quick and low-cost administrative procedure to have an
issued patent reviewed by the PTO for patentability against printed prior
art raising a new question of validity. While the courts seem, in general,
willing to defer to the Patent Office on such issues, the use of reexamination
has been less than had been predicted by its proponents. Perhaps more time is
needed for patent owners and others to use this system more regularly as an
alternative to litigation, in any event, recent legislation has opened up
issues of patent validity and infringement as proper subjects for arbitration.
1
CMA 037988
2
By next year, we should begin to know whether or not this new alternative to
expensive patent litigation will be used widely. Arbitration may be the
preferred route for deciding if sensitive commercial activity invalidates a
patent on either prior use or best mode grounds, or avoids infringement for
technical reasons which neither party wishes to be made public. Reexamination
will remain the non-litigation alternative for dealing with printed prior art.
C. Litigation Improvement. A major change in 1982 has been the creation
of the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which has appellate jurisdiction
over all cases arising under the patent laws, as well as over appeals from the
Patent and Trademark Office. By developing a uniform body of interpretations,
it is hoped that this court will eliminate forum shopping in patent litigation.
Because the Court was formed by the merger of (1) one court with experience
in appeals from the Patent and Trademark Office and from the International
Trade Commission and (2) another court with experience in claims against the
Government, this new Appeals Court can be expected to show a high level of
understanding of the technical and commercial significance of patents.
II. LEGISLATION CARRIED OVER
A. Patent Term Restoration. The biggest disappointment this year has
been the failure to enact legislation extending the term of patents whose
effective term has been eroded by years of regulatory delay. As Dick
Waterman reported to you last year, the CMA Patent and Trademark Committee had a
principal role in drafting this legislative proposal. Following the lead
of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, we hope to push this bill
into law during the next Congress; the press of other business and opposition
by key Senators and Congressmen prevented this bill from being enacted in
spite of majority support in both Houses.
B. Employed Inventors' Agreements. Two attempts were made last year
to regulate by Federal law the contractual relationship between employed
, inventors and their enployers. We expect these efforts to intensify next year,
particularly in the area of defining fields in which the employee's inventions
are assigned to his employer and other fields in which the employer has
no investment. The topic of statutory compensation to employees when their
inventions are used commercially will also be raised. These issues will
be monitored closely,and reconmiendations for CMA positions will be made,
if Congress seems likely to act on either proposal.
III. INTERNATIONAL - 1982 DEVELOPMENTS
The major developments on the international front have been recent attempts
by developing countries to revise the Paris Convention, the basic international
treaty regarding patent filing, to permit a country to order cancellation or
compulsory licensing of a patent not locally worked within a few years.
While the U.S. Government has been supportive of industry in opposing these
proposals, we have had to work with our counterparts in Europe to encourage
their governments to take a similar stand.
CMA 037989
I
I
X
a
3
1983
A. Changes in the U.S. Substantive Law Regarding Extraterritorial
Application of U.S. Patents. There are two provisions of U.S. patent law
which differ from the laws of most other countries in a way that places a
U.S. manufacturer at a competitive disadvantage in international trade, when
his sole patent protection relates to improved processes for making known
products, as is often the case in the chemical industry, he cannot use the
courts to challenge those practicing the process abroad and importing the
product. His remedy before the International Trade Commission has many other
conditions, unrelated to patent issues, that he would not have to meet in a
normal civil action. An analogous provision of U.S. law provides no effective
remedy for the holder of a patent on a machine having several components
against another party who manufactures the consonants in the U.S. for
assembly abroad. We will be reviewing proposed legislation next year to
remedy both of these problems.
B. Changes in Interference Practice. We will also be reviewing
proposals to reform the interference practice used by the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office to determine priority among inventors claiming the same
invention in order to expedite these determinations. A symptom of problems
in this area is that a patent is now issuing on crystalline polypropylene that
could be enforceable until the end of the century.
C. Other Issues. Other areas that we plan to review are the treatment
of related inventions by different combinations of inventors in the orporate
setting; uniform policies for ownership of patents, data and software
resulting from government-funded research; and the possible implementation
of the examination chapter of the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
CONCLUSION
The current political climate represents an unprecedented opportunity
to reform the entire patent system in the U.S. to make patents reliable
assets for investors in technology. The increased costs and delays asso­
ciated with bringing innovative products and processes to market make the
need for enforceable patents and affordable enforcement procedures more
urgent. We hope that 1983 brings continued improvements in these areas
domestically, together with renewed efforts to prevent an erosion of the
patent system in the international context.
CMA
CMA 037990
EXHIBIT D
SUMMARY OF
INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMITTEE
REPORT TO CMA BOARD
January 10, 1983
with chemical exports deerseeing and isports increasing in a world
swinging toward nor* protectionism, tha mission of CMA's International
Trade conmittee is to further the industry's ability to oon$>ete by work­
ing to decrease unfair trade-related impediments to ccepetition in the
Major 1982 acoonvliahments of the committee and its five task
groins are grouped under task group headings:
Investment Policy: Reviewed and related to U.S. Trade Representa­
tive industry views on model bilateral investment treaty and two treaties
specific to Egypt and Panama.
Inter-Governmental: Supported coalition position on Vredeling pro­
posal which, in its current amended version, was a victory for U.S. multi­
nationals. Worked to moderate United Nations activities affecting chemical
trade and investment.
Import Policy: Began development of position on Generalized System
of Preferences, kept membership informed of tariff "harmonization" including
sponsorship of a seminar, followed Administration' a Caribbean Basin. Initia­
tive and Export Trading Company Act.
Export Policy: Supported Danforth "reciprocity” legislative effort
and developed positions on intellectual property rights and anti-boycott
regulations.
Export of Hazardous Substances: Effectively worked to move accept­
able report draft through Departoents of state and Cosmerce and the USTB
which led to draft of an Executive Order from the White House.
In addition to these task group-specific issues, the committee was
active in other areas.
Primary among these was petrochemical-related discussions between
the U.S. government and those of Europe, Japan and Mexico.
Representing the committee as well as their individual companies, mem­
bers assisted to the degree possible with six separate government agency
studies concerning petrochemical "competitiveness" and reviewed an American.
Enterprise Institute proposal for an overview study of U.S. trade policy.
To facilitate communication with member company trade contacts, a com­
pendium of committee positon end background papers was issued at our
CMA 037991
October open nesting and subsequently mailed to ITC task group members.
For 1983* tha committee sees itself actively involvad in additonal
patroehamical discussions, with tha lagialativa and regulatory phaaaa
of tha erport of hazardous substances, with Generalized System of Frafarancaa policy foxaulaton, with reciprocity legislation, and investaasntralatad iaauea.
tha cojmittaa and ita task groups ara well-positioned to further
induatry trade-ralatad aaada. However, committee mMtiira feel atrongly
that Ott member coavanies currently having little in the wey of trade
expertiee ahould serloualy aonalder developing it. Zs^ortance of trade
matters, far from fading away, will increase significantly in the aoatha
and years ahead
CMA
CMA 037992
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD
BY ROBERT E.
CHAIRMAN, INTERNATIONAL
JANUARY 10,
OF DIRECTORS
LORY
TRADE COMMITTEE
1983
This morning I'll be reporting to you on the work of CMA's International
Trade Committee in 1982, the second year of its formal existence. It's
obvious to all of us that in recent years chemical industry sales and
earnings have depended upon large volumes of exports. Three measurements
currently, however, are on an unfortunate downtrend.
In 1981 the dollar value of U.S. chemical exports was $21.2 billion,
in 1982 the value slipped to $20.4.billion.
For two consecutive years, the trade surplus in chemicals — the excess
of exports over imports — has decreased. The 1980, 1981 and 1982 dollar
values were, respectively, $12.2 billion, $11.9 billion and $10.9 billion.
Over the same two-year span, the share of industry sales going to the
export trade has declined from 12.8 percent to 11.8 percent.
The two sides of our current trade reality are clear: chemical exports
are decreasing while at the same time imports are on the rise.
There's another trade reality that the U.S. chemical industry has to
reckon with as well, and that is the swing toward protectionism we are
seeing all around the globe -~ including the U.S. This industry is
confident of its ability to compete in world trade — to the extent that
we are not blocked from doing so by governmental barriers, whether the
government be our own or that of a foreign country. While the words
of the International Trade Cosnittee's charter may say it more color­
fully, a short-text version of our mission is to work to remove existing
barriers and to derail attempts to create new ones.
With this mission as our focus, this morning I'll be covering what I
see as the Committee's major accomplishments during the year and the
major issues before us in 1983.
First a word on organization.
In 1982 two task groups were refocused and a new task group created —
bringing our task group number to five, we broadened the mission of the
North American Trade Policy Task Croup to include all import matters
affecting CMA member companies. The task group's name was changed to
Import Policy Task Croup-. We expanded the membership of our Multinational
Corporations Task Group and changed its name to the Intergovernmental
Organizations Task Group to better reflect its proper focus. Early in
CMA 037993
the year we formed an Investment Policy task Group to more adequately
cover this policy area and to provide support to Dexter Baker who is now
Chairman of the Investment Policy Advisory committee set up by the Trade
Representative's office.
Since I plan to cover 1982 accomplishments by task group area of concern,
the Investment Group is a good place to start. Shortly after its formation,
the group focused on the subject of bilateral investment treaties.
Through its work, we were able to give the Association's view on a model
treaty to United States Trade Representative (USTR) Ambassador Brock.
Investment treaties specific to Egypt and Panama were also discussed
with USTR.
This group also prepared and distributed to member companies a survey on
foreign investment to provide the committee with member input on specific
problem areas that should be addressed. Fifty-three companies responded,
and the data provided is now being analyzed by the task group.
I
Turning to the Intergovernmental Task Group, a main concern of its members
last year was the so-called "Vredeling Proposal" in the European coonunity.
As Leo Johnstone reported to you in October, the then-current draft of
the proposal called for advance consultation with workers on a variety of
management decisions — including investments in other parts of the world.
The Association supported the joint National Foreign Trade Couneil/U.S.
Council position on the issue and the heavily amended version that was
approved by the European Parliament was clearly a defeat for its backers
and was viewed as resulting from effective lobbying by U.S. multinationals.
A major reason behind the formation of this task group was the variety
of activities concerning international companies going on in various
agencies of the United Nations. During 1982 these activities were priori­
tized from the U.S. chemical industry perspective, and a number of meetings
with U.N. officials took place — including one with U.S. Ambassador
Kirkpatrick.
While developing countries often seem to be the loudest voices in the U.N.,
they are also loud in their demands for special treatment by individual
industrialized countries -- notably the United States and particularly
with respect to our treatment of the products they wish us to import.
The General System of Preferences (GSP) is an important U.S. recognition
of this demand. The system offers duty-free entry of a wide variety of
commodity and finished goods. GSP became effective January 4, 1976 and
will expire on January 3, 1985. The USTR administers GSP and it and the
Congress are expected to be holding hearings this year on its renewal.
Preparatory to our active involvement with this issue, the Import Policy
Task Group prepared and distributed to selected CMA members a questionnaire
designed to gather data on member awareness of and concern about GSP.
Our position is now in the early development stage.
I
i
1
CMA 037994
The U.S. tariff schedule in general is getting CMA attention due to the
program to "harmonize" our schedule with the Customs Corporation Council
Nomenclature, which is used by most of the world’s other industrialized
nations. Late in 1982, the International Trade Commission released
Chapters 28 and 29 of the new code. These deal with commodity inorganic
and organic chemicals, respectively. Chapters 30-39, dealing with enduse chemical products, are expected to be released in February. The
entire project is scheduled to be concluded by July 1, 1983, with imple­
mentation of the new harmonized code set for mid-1985. While unable to
take positions on individual products, CMA recognizes its potential
importance to members as some products will see significant tariff increases
or decreases. Because of this, we sponsored — with SOCMA and SPI — a
trade seminar on the subject that was attended by 45 industry representatives.
We will continue to supply timely information and procedural guidance to
member companies.
On a matter specific to this hemisphere, the Import Policy Task Group
reviewed the Administration's "Caribbean Basin Initiative" which was a
three-pronged program of trade, tax incentives and supplemental aid to
the Caribbean Basin countries to assist their economic progress. CMA
did not take a position on this subject, in that the bill currently
drafted does not offer significant chemical investment potential either
as an opportunity or threat for U.S. producers. However, we continue to
monitor the bill's progress.
Another piece of legislation on which we took no specific position was
the Export Trading Company Act, which is now law. This legislation may,
however, be helpful to smaller companies, and through the CMA News, we
informed members who might be interested in the subject about Commerce
Department and U.S. Chamber seminars dealing with it.
During 1982, a host of protectionist cries were raised in Washington,
many of which prominently featured a new buzzword, "reciprocity". Our
Export Policy Task Group was active in an industry coalition supporting
Senator Danforth's bill (S. 2094) which provides for extending Section 301
of the trade law to cover services, intellectual property rights, and
foreign direct investment. In July, CMA endorsement of the Danforth bill
— without amendments — was sent to the Senate Finance Committee. No
real action took place on this bill in 1982, but I'll consent further on
its outlook when I cover 1983 issues.
A position specific to the protection of intellectual property rights was
developed and forwarded to Commerce Secretary Baldrige. The Export Task
Group also prepared a position dealing with anti-boycott regulations;
this, however, has not been issued externally as yet, as we are awaiting
action by the Business Roundtable and the U.S. Chamber, who have the leads
on this issue.
CMA 037995
Our fifth task group has bean dealing with one specific policy issue —
that of the export of so-called "hazardous substances". The rescinding of
President Carter's overly restrictive Executive Order was a direct result
of chemical industry efforts, and a number of CMA suggestions have been
incorporated in the present acceptable form of the proposed new order now
in the White House. Our objective all along has been to keep this as a
simple notification scheme — without any form of government control and
not tied to specific shipments. So far, we've succeeded. To put the
industry stake here in perspective, the wrong outcome on this one would
immediately put into jeopardy some half billion dollars worth of pesticides
exports.
In addition to issues worked mostly within our task groups, the Committee
has been active in a number of other areas.
A primary area of activity has centered on petrochemical discussions
between the U.s. and other governments. While discussions with the Connon
Market were dormant during 1982, CMA provided two groups of advisors to
assist the O.S. Trade Representative and the Department of commerce,
respectively, in preparing for and carrying out talks with Japan and Mexico,
u.s. efforts in the Japanese talks were directed toward giving them a
better understanding of what they considered to be our unnatural advantage
in natural gas pricing. Mexican focus, while not yet clarified, is
expected to be on the export of their products into the U.S. Leo Johnstone
has led the CMA-fielded groups of industry advisors with excellent results
to date. With respect to the Mexican talks, the Committee formulated a
set of proposed U.S. objectives and passed these to Commerce.
One thing these discussion activities highlight is that U.S. industry,
with all its problems, is far from being alone in searching for solutions.
Last month, delegations from CMA and CEFIC met — at the Europeans'
request — to discuss common views with respect to a number of inter­
national trade matters.
A familiar response to a perceived problem is to initiate a study. During
1982, six separate studies regarding various aspects of petrochemical
"competitiveness" were progressed by various U.S. agencies. These include
the Commerce Department, the International Trade Commission (two studies),
the USTR, the World Bank/IMF, and the Office of Technology Assessment.
The committee and member companies assisted to the degree possible with
each. In connection with one of the International Trade Commission studies
— on investment performance requirements — the Committee prepared a
"statement for the record" on the short-comings of the questionnaire
designed to provide its data base. The "use" of these various studies
bureaucratic study often is not a precursor to but, more times than not,
a substitute for meaningful action.
CMA 037996
If these government-initiated studies were not enough, last year the
Committee reported to you that we were working to develop a study of the
chemical industry's international trade problems. This was dropped as a
chemical industry project, but an ad hoc group of industry members have
interested the American Enterprise Institute in conducting a wider study
of U.S. trade policy. CMA has reviewed and taken no exception to the
initial effort to scope the study. The Association will not be participating
as a financial supporterWith governmental and media interest in trade at seemingly an all-time
high, the Committee felt it worthwhile to develop for its own use a set
of general communication guidelines which put current and future trade
policy matters in perspective.
On a related topic, the development of positions is effective only insofar
as they are communicated. In addition to the specific targeting of position
papers I've mentioned earlier, late last year the Committee put together
a compendium of its positions and background papers. This was distributed
at our October Open Meeting and subsequently mailed to each member company
trade contact. Additionally, throughout the year, trade contacts were
provided with information on a wide variety of trade related topics.
What's ahead for us this year?
The short answer is more of the same.
Government-to-government petrochemical discussions still will be with us,
Mexico is currently anticipated to be the most important in 1983, but Japan
talks could be re-instituted at any time. Canada also at any time could
initiate a request for discussions. While in recent months European
talks have been dormant, these too could awaken.
with respect to the Export of Hazardous Substances issue — should the
Presidential Executive Order be, as we expect, acceptable to industry, this
subject will still demand close CMA scrutiny in its subsequent legislative
and regulatory phases.
We also will be closely monitoring developments as OSTR and Congress
formulate their policies regarding renewal of the Generalised System of
Preferences.
We can expect protectionist voices to continue calling for reciprocity
legislation. With other groups, CMA will continue to push for S. 2094
without amendments. This isn't going to be easy, and I can't say the
outlook is very favorable.
We will continue to work closely with USTR and others as appropriate on
Bilateral Investment Treaties and other investment related issues.
4
CMA 037997
The U.N. moves slowly, but given its role as a forum for developing
countries and given these countries' attitudes about multinationals and
their role in the "New Economic Order”, and a host of views that boil
down to an "It is more blessed to receive than give" posture, selective
monitoring of U.N. activities is clearly warranted.
And, we'll no doubt have some surprises from legislators and regulators
— both here and abroad — as they seek to further their individual causes
at chemical industry cost.
For its work in 1983, the Committee has the resources it needs. It, has
an active and knowledgeable membership. Its task groups have excellent
participation and management. Committee and task groups benefit from
excellent CMA staff support — and from the active and effective partici­
pation of industry leaders such as Leo Johnstone and Dexter Baker who,
with Conmittee members and CMA staff, have maintained close ties with key
government people. He have excellent rapport and high credibility in this
general area of trade where industry objectives are similar to those of
the Administration.
In closing, I would, however, ask each of you to consider the active
participation of your trade experts in our Committee task groups. If you
perhaps have no one in your organization who you would judge to be such
an expert, I submit that you seriously consider developing that expertise.
I further submit that membership on one of our task groups is a costeffective way to obtain it. I firmly believe you need this expertise.
In past years, "trade" as such may not have been all that glamorous a
subject. But if one measures glamor by the amount of news media attention
a subject gets, that past truth is truth no longer. Glamor aside, I'm
hopeful that my presentation this morning has helped underscore the
subject's importance to this industry today — and, more important,
tomorrow.
CMA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In 1982 the major tax problems faced by the chemical industry were
presented in the context of legislation to reduce growing federal budget
deficits in significant part by increasing taxes on business. Tax measures
which are considered in this political context are judged primarily on
their ability to raise Federal revenues, rather than on merit or reason.
During this past year CMA and its member companies were successful
largely by limiting legislative'tax losses, rather than by obtaining new
tax benefits. Although these achievements were made in the context of
legislation which substantially reduced the income tax benefits of investing
in chemical plant and equipment, they were nonetheless important. These
achievements include:
o
o
o
o
Rejection of proposed alternative minimum tax
Maintenance of foreign tax credit and deferral of tax
on current foreign income of foreign subsidiaries
Maintenance of Domestic International Sales Corporations
(DISC) provisions with current benefits reduced by 15 percent
Maintenance of Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) with
reduction of 5 percent of ACRS benefits when full 10 percent
investment tax credit is taken on ACRS property
With Federal budget deficits for Fiscal 1983 and Fiscal 1984 now projected
to exceed $175 and $200 billion respectively, we anticipate that the Adminis­
tration and the Congress will again seek in the 98th Congress to reduce th s
deficits through tax increase legislation. The problems encountered in 1982
by CMA and the chemical industry are likely to be repeated in 1983.
In this environment, the Tax Policy Contittee will direct its efforts in
1983 to the following major tax goals and objectives:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
Monitor tax and funding aspects of public compensation
legislation and consult with other CMA committees on
appropriate action.
Maintain tax incentives for U.S. exports which are at least
equivalent to DISC
Maintain present treatment of foreign tax credit and deferral
of current income of foreign subsidiaries
Maintain and improve Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS)
and Investanent Tax Credit
Resist any increase or expansion of minimum tax on corporations
Improve and extend tax credit for research and development
Extend statutory moratorium on Treasury Regulations § 1.861-8
which require allocation of research and development expenses
to foreign income
Provide chemical industry connnents on Treasury Regulations
(when issued) interpreting CERCLA taxes on chemicals and
petroleum
Provide chemical industry cosnents on Treasury Regulations
(when issued) on 1981 ERTA and 1982 TEFRA legislation.
CMA
CMA 037999
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
ay GLENN W, WHITS
CHAIRMAN. TAX POLICY COMMITTEE
JANUARY 10, 1383
1982 was not a good year for the chemical industry in terms of U.S. tax
policy. Changes in U.S. tax law adopted as the Tax Equity and Fiscal
Responsibility Act of 1982 (TEFRA) now place the chemical industry in a
position worse than when this Administration took office. It is important
to note that the TEFRA changes were not as adverse proportionately for
other industries, such as basic metal production or oil refining.
How bad were the 1982 changes? In 1980 the "Superfund" legislation was
adopted. Many observers in the chemical industry viewed that event as
one of the worst that has ever befallen this industry. Superfund calls
for the collection of about $1.4 billion over a 5-year period. This is
an after-tax amount of about $150 million per year, of which the chemical
industry is paying 80 percent or $120 million per year.
(In fact, actual
collections are somewhat less because of low industry operating levels.)
The 2 percent reduction in investment tax credit costs the chemical industry
over $250 million annually, more than twice as much as Superfund. Remember,,
the reduction in investment tax credit was only one part of the adverse
changes in TEFRA.
Ironically, much of the' adverse impact from TEFRA may not be felt by the
industry in 1983 because of the poor overall condition of the U.S. economy.
On the positive side, several adverse proposals did not become law. The
proposed alternative minimum tax was not adopted. There was 'no legislation
making significant adverse changes in the U.S. taxation of foreign source
income. The acceleration of depreciation from 7.5 to 5 years that had
become law in 1981 was preserved, although the future improvement in the
rate of depreciation that was to have become effective in 1985 and 1986 was
lost with an impact in those years of more than $1.5 billion in cash for the
industry.
Having set the stage with these comments on the state of tax affairs, let
me assure you that the Tax Policy Committee is alive and well and doingits best in light of the help we get from our friends in government.
The committee's membership presently stands at 21. Committee meetings are
generally attended by more*individuals than that number. All of the members
are active, and each one brings a valuable perspective and insight to the
conmittae.
CMA 038000
We have three operating task groups: Capital Formation, Foreign Taxation,
and Value Added Taxation. We are in the process of establishing a new task
group in the area of State and Local Taxation. This latter area has become
of more concern with the concept of "New Federalism" and the concommitant
need for more funds by the states.
In the task groups, we make an effort to include persons other them
committee members. This gives an opportunity for a larger group to participate
in industry tax affairs.
It also provides the committee with an opportunity
to obtain the special talents of experts and an opportunity to see prospective
future committee members in action.
The role of the Tax Policy Committee is to keep you advised of all relevant
developments in the tax area. To do this we carefully watch proposed legis­
lation, the promulgation of new regulations, prospective treaties and new
litigation. Where any of these facets of developing tax law alert us to
changes that affect the industry, we will advise you on the implications of
such developments. Where appropriate, we will suggest policies the industry
may wish to follow.
In developing new industry positions, we work towards a consensus view. After
all, a position cannot be that of the industry unless substantially all of'
the members find it at least acceptable. That means the debate is occasion­
ally crisp. Nonetheless, we generally can reach quick accord because we
recognize the other side is the government and it wants our money.
Tax legislative policy probably presents a different problem than any other
issue the industry faces. Tax legislation is an ever-present issue that is
not resolved by a legislative enactment. Instead, the federal tax law is
under ongoing review by the Senate Finance Committee and House Ways and Means
Committee and the various staff organizations, as well as the individual
members' staffs. There has been some sort of serious tax legislative thrust
posed in each Congressional session since 1968. Significant laws were enacted
in 1969, 1971, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1978, 1980, 1981 and 1982. Because of the
ongoing nature of these enactments, and because of the peculiarly complicated
and highly technical nature of this legislation, it is necessary to provide
continuous review and contact, particularly with the staff persons in Congress
and Treasury who are responsible for developing new legislation.
Member companies carry out this activity on an individual basis both through
their technical tax staffs and government relations offices. The continuity
in the Tax Policy Connittee as presently constituted better enables us to
follow and adopt sound positions in the ever-changing matrix of technical
proposals.
CMA 038001
CMA's staff representative for the Tax Policy Committee came to us from the
House Ways and Means Committee and, as a consequence, can and does assist
the committee in being aware of what is happening in the staff arena.
sk
ne
:ipatw
t
f
ry
I
The committee continues to use the law firm of Miller and Chevalier as outside
counsel- Messers. Sherfy and Heyde from that firm provide valuable assistance
in drafting position papers for the committee after the positions are establish­
ed. They and other members of the firm provide valuable insights on a variety
of tax issues as new situations develop.
During 1983 we foresee development of a number of serious tax issues. With a
budget deficit in excess of $150 billion, it is almost certain an effort will
be made to raise taxes, including the corporate income tax. Several areas are
likely to be affected. Probably there will be a second bite at the investment
tax credit apple. If recapture of the whole credit is taken out of basis, the
credit would be reduced to about 6 percent, with an additional cost to the
chemical industry of $280 million. There is a sentiment to tax employee
benefits such as medical and other insurance premiums, and perhaps some forms
of deferred compensation not presently taxed. There seems to be a renewed
interest in taxing the overseas operations of U.S. corporations.
fter
A new tax thrust is posed by the so-called public compensation legislation.'
The tax watch on this legislation is critical. In my view, this could be a
legislative catastrophe for the industry.
is
jd
3SS
It is likely there will be changes during 1983 in the way U.S. exports will
be taxed. It is clear that the members of the GATT Council are convinced that
the existing Domestic International Sales Corporation (DISC) is in breach of
the subsidies code. Our Deputy Trade Representative has agreed the Adminis­
tration will prepare legislation in this area.. Although Treasury has rec­
ommended that the DISC be repealed, and that no tax substitute be established
in its place, there is good sentiment for a continuation of tax support for
U.S. exports. The Tax Policy Committee will press strongly for a tax system
that provides export assistance at least equivalent to the DISC. — Here I
pause for my only coranercial. We of Dow hope you'll support an effort to
revise the system so the presently accrued DISC earnings will not be taxed in
the future. Believe me, it is more important to most of you than it is to me.
End of commercial. —
We await regulations interpreting the tax law in several important areas.
Mo regulations have been issued for the windfall profits tax, or for
superfund. Regulations are due any day now on the foreign tax credit; of
course, I've been told that consistently for more than nine months. I guess
you'd call that an inhuman gestation period. Almost no regulations have
been issued in connection with the 1981 ERTA and 1982 TEFRA legislation.
CMA 038002
We stand prepared to comment on all of these regulations as they come forth
in proposed form.
This past year we undertook a new activity for the committee. We filed an
amici brief in support of a member company's attempt to get to the U.S.
Supreme Court. This issue involves the availability to the Internal Revenue
Service of the corporate analysis of its tax reserve account. That account
establishes the potential liability of the taxpayer on issues in the tax
return about which there is some question. CMA is supporting the taxpayer's
effort to get a review of this matter by the Supreme Court.
We propose to continue to provide support to you in all of these tax areas.
We are willing to undertake any other efforts you, the Board, the Executive
Committee or members request.
We do have a favor to ask in return. If we
accepting or rejecting it so we can take an
freeze us by inaction. Remember we want to
in the strongest and best way we can find.
find a new position more acceptable to you.
propose a policy, help us by
effective position. Please don't
represent the chemical industry
If a position is rejected, we can
I have had the pleasure of working with many excellent tax committees and
tax organizations. The CMA Tax Policy Committee is outstanding. It has
been my pleasure to be its chairman.
CMA
CMA 038003
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
EXHIBIT F
CMA's communications program reflects ths shift in
direction to an issue-oriented, balanced industry communi­
cations program.
This advocacy campaign draws on the com­
bined resources and perspectives of the Association's
Government ‘Relations, Technical and Communications
departments, providing a stronger force with which the
Association can communicate with legislators, other
associations and industries, and the general public.
CMA's
focused, cost-effective communications program is aimed at
developing an equitable environment in which to develop public
policy.
The Communications Committee, its task groups and the
CMA staff are the backbone of this communications program.
Together, these groups create elements that include news
relations and general public relations activities.
Mews media activities are designed to voice industry
and Association policy and programs to the press.
These
reflect the department's close relationship with Government
Relations and the Association's shift to targeted efforts.
This program element grows in importance as our relationship
with the press consistently needs nurturing both from a
national and local community level.
The media tour program
reached more than 99.cities by the first of January including
178 television, 152 radio and 209 newspaper interviews with
CMA staff and Science Advisory Group members.
Clearly, this
kind of activity enhances CMA and industry relationships with
the press and gives us one more positive step toward achieving
balanced reporting.
Another approach to broadening press relationships is the
placement of CMA officers and executives on major speaking
platforms, such as the Detroit Economic Club, the World Affairs
Council of Pittsburgh and the Executive Club of Chicago.
The
first of these featured CMA Chairman Simeral speaking on the
Policy Agenda for the Chemical Industry in 1983, focusing on
the economy, international trade and environmental regulation.
Twenty reporters from national and trade publications partici­
pated.
This kind of activity creates a positive profile for
the industry.
The news media section will be instrumental in helping
to develop major communications efforts over the course of the
year focusing on specific critical issues such as hazardous
waste disposal and. public compensation.
These efforts will
include many aspects of the ongoing CMA communications program,
i.e. special press kits to be used at the local level, radio
broadcast and telSvision programming, issues advertising and
speaker engagements.
An example of this kind of specialized
issue effort is the "clean water" program currently in effect
and targeted for four congressional districts.
This effort
includes media tours, which began in December in areas of
West Virginia, New York State and Kentucky.
These will be
followed by radio broadcasts and issues advertising when the
Clean Water Act reau.thorization is introduced in Congress-.
This communications strategy is successful in reaching the
CMA 038004
Representatives of these districts, it will be used with
other issues alsawhara.
CHA broadcast network continuas to axpand.
It includes
THE REPORT, a series of three-minute newsfeatures distributed
biweekly to a 1,500 station network, spontaneous newsfeeds
with actuality sent to anywhere from 1,250 to 1,650 stations,
90-second television newsfeatures and expanded activity at
the American Women in Radio and Television (AWRT) and the
National Farm Broadcasters Association (NAFB) conventions.
A prime example of the 'good' that comes from such efforts is
the press and broadcast activity surrounding the Livingston, Loui.
siana, train'derailment in September.
CHEMTREC, CMA's
Chemical Transportation Emergency Center, was notified of the
incident within minutes of the derailment.
The director of
CHEMTRE-C participated in 14 telephone interviews.
These
efforts were supported by the CHEMTREC newsfmature which was
flown to seven local stations and the cable news network,
reaching an audience of more than 36 million people, producing
balanced reporting while diffusing negative reactions toward
the chemical industry.
Although the national print advertising has been termi­
nated, some localized issues advertising on specific topics
-is being prepared for use in targeted areas.
Currently, a
clean water ad to be signed by a national coalition is being
developed to support the clean water efforts in congressional
districts in West Virginia and New York State.
The CMA
Advertising Task Group has allotted $30,000 to the Special
Clean Water Work Group for this effort.
Other issues
advertising is being developed on an as needed basis in
support of other program activities.
In the last 27 years, CMA's Catalyst Awards Program has
honored 134 college, junior college and high school teachers
with national awards.
Some of these winners have displayed
outstanding speaking talents and will be considered for pos­
sible speaking engagements to further CMA's contact with
various educational and consumer groups.
This is an inexpen­
sive way of tapping a greatly underused resource.
Production of four public service announcements (PSAs)
are targeted for completion in the spring.
These PSAs will
be in keeping with the new issue-focus and will be distribu­
ted to 200 major market stations.
Osage will be tracked to
evaluate the success
and cost-effectiveness of this activity.
The three PSAs extracted from "The Need to Know,”
CMA's
16 ma. film on hazardous waste disposal, have been aired
1,500 times with an approximate viewing audience of 36 million.
Distribution of "The Need to Know” and "Doing Something"
continues with community group showings of more than 1,750 to
an estimated viewing audience of nearly 48,000.
Television airings for the two films are more than 500 with an estimated
audience of 1.15 million.
CMA 038005
-3CMA's consumer information program continual to identify "multiplier" organizations who will transmit Association
massagas to millions of viewers and raadars at minimal cost.
Existing print and audio visual material is being marketed
to such groups.
Programs with AWRT are being reevaluated
for their cost-efficiency.
Activities with NAFB last year
included 80 five-minute television and 208 radio interviews
made by 45 broadcasters.
The estimated listening audience
was 10 million and total air time was 31 hours.
A new
project is planned for the in-house production and national
satellite delivery of 10 consumer information pieces for TV
news and talk shows.
This will be coordinated with other
CMA broadcast activities.
With greater attention to cost, CMA is evaluating the
mailing lists of its two newsletters, ChemEcology and CMA
News.
Both are being evaluated for possible reduction in
number of pages and a reader survey of each is also being
considered.
CheaEcology Special Reports continue to be
included in special news media packages for the press.
CMA is supporting a pilot regional communications pro­
gram in Louisiana with the Louisiana Chemical Association
This program reflects the Association's focus on
state and local issues.
The national purpose of this pilot
program is to develop a model plan that other states and areas
can use as well as to create a more positive public identity
for the chemical industry in Louisiana.
Limited to one
state, the program is molded to that state's communications
needs and will be carried out by the state chemical industry
council or its equivalent along with the support of companies
that make up the council.
CMA is providing $100,000 for the
pilot and will offer guidance to LCA and its public relati ns
director.
The program is being put into place this month
and will be evaluated after one year.
The CMA communications program was funded until now by
a separate "ChemCAP" assessment which stood at 40 percent
of member company dues.
With the dollars saved by the eli­
mination of the national print advertising program added to
existing carry-over funds, CMA was able to reduce the 82/83
assessment to 20 percent.
Beginning in fiscal year 83/84,
the special assessment will be wrapped into overall dues.
The assessment'.wrap-in reflects the industry's commitment
to an industry communications program that is well-balanced,
cost-effective and a necessary support to all Association
activities.
CMA
CMA 038006
REMARKS TO CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
By William M. Metten Jr.
Chairman, Communications Committee
January 10, 1983
The Communications Committee appreciates this opportunity
to bring you up-to-date on our industry's communications pro­
grams, priorities and problems.
In the next few minutes I
would like to outline a new direction in the focus of our
communications program, share with you several examples of how
CMA communications activities support our industry's goals, and,
lastly, touch on the future communications challenges facing our
industry.
But first, a brief overview of how the public perceives the
chemical industry may be of interest.
The negative perception
that the public has of our industry has not changed.
The public
believes that the industry is irresponsible in its management of
wastes and is unwilling to deal with critical environmental
issues unless forced by federal and state legislation.
The public's perception of us as bad guys is influenced and
reinforced by a news media which is steadily chipping away at
the private enterprise fabric of our society...by docu-dramas
that protray business and businessmen as dishonest and motivated
by money alone...by the outcries of environmentalists and selfstyled protectors of the public interest.
It's no wonder, is it, that opinion survey after opinion
survey shows such a negative public attitude toward our industry
with the hazardous waste issue the foremost issue preoccupying
the public's perception.
And like it or not, perception equals
reality in the public's mind.
Our cause is not aided either by the fact that the Admini­
stration, because of economic and other political considerations,
has not been able to provide the leadership necessary to influence
legislative activities to deal with the problems of our industry.
Within the past six months CMA's communications program has
undergone a significant change in direction.
Three factors are
primarily responsible for bringing about this change.
One will
certainly come as no surprise to anyone in this room -- the
economy has not been kind to our industry.
In this adverse
economic climate, the Communications Committee recognized the
need to reduce communications expenditure, a decision consistent
with actions taken by many member companies.
As you know, a
substantial reduction In CMA communications expenditures occurred
in the print advertising area.
As a result of eliminating the
national print advertising program, the 1982 ChemCAP assessment
has been reduced from 40 percent to 20 percent.
The second factor contributing to a change in the direction
of our communications program is a closer liaison with CMA's
Government R lations Committee.
CMA 038007
A strong relationship between Government Relations and
Communications is essential when you consider the necessity
for our industry's communications to be focused around and
in support of the legislative issues facing our industry.
A
stronger bridge has been built between the Communications and
Government Relations Committees for cross-fertilization of ideas
and planning communications strategies and building constituencies.
This is a relatively recent marriage.
At this point, both partners
are enthusiastic about the opportunities for coordinating CMA
communications more closely with government relations objectives.
We look forward to the day when this approach bears fruit.
The third element of the new direction in our industry's
communications activities is a desire to try new and different
approaches in our ongoing commitment to reshape the public's
negative perception of our industry.
We recognize that we are
locked into a constant and shifting battle for the public's under­
standing and support.
Results are difficult to come by.
Victories
are few.
But we must vote present on the issues and use every
means at our disposal to communicate the industry's accomplishments
and commitment on industry issues.
We have initiated two activities
which illustrate the use of innovative communications approaches
to accomplish these objectives.
One involves a pilot regional
communications program in cooperation with the Louisiana Chemical
Association.
This program will be tailored to that state's communications
priorities, and the leadership is being provided by Louisiana
Chemical Association and its member companies.
Funds are being madti
available from our communications budget for one year.
The Louisi­
ana experiment begins this month.
We hope that the experience
gained will be useful in developing model communications programs
for use in other states to develop public policy support at the
grass roots level.
1
Another innovative approach involves a grass roots communica­
tions program in support of clean water.
This is the first time
that we have targeted a single message within key congressional
districts to build a coalition of supporters and activate a public
relations campaign at the grass roots level.
Here again, this is
a learning experience, and we are hopeful that it will produce
results which can be applied elsewhere.
Personally speaking,
I am excited about these new approaches
and the new direction that our communications program is taking.
I know that our Communications Committee shares this feeling.
The members of our committee -- your employees -- have contributed
greatly to shape and guide these new communications activities.
Now I would like to touch on the other communications activities which continue to play an important role in CMA's overall
communications program.
CMA 038008
I am referring to such activities as:
CMA's media tours which are planned around a specific
issue and targeted for maximum impact in geographical areas and
congressional districts.
Media tours consistently delivered
results, and we are increasing the tours in 1933.
Broadcast communications is another results-oriented
communications activity.
CMA now broadcasts a regular series
of three-minute radio features dedicated to major issues of the
association and distributed bi-weekly to 1900 stations.
e
The balanced television newsfeed continues to be a key
ingredient in our news activities.
For example, we fed a recent
feature on Superfund via satellite to more than 400 stations.
e
Consumer information programming -- this activity con­
tinues to generate results and good will for our industry and
maintains mutually beneficial relations between CMA and consum r,
public interest, educational and other influential groups.
Th
objective here is also to advocate our position on major issues
as well as provide a forum for member companies to talk about their
individual product benefits.
At conventions like the American Women in Radio and Televi­
sion, industry experts are interviewed on a variety of subjects.
In the aftermath of the train derailment at Livingston, Louisiana,
CMA's Chemtrec staff and news service department turned some
adverse circumstances into a positive media experience.
In the time remaining I would like to take a prospective look
at the major issues confronting our industry and suggest some ways
that our Communications Committee is considering addressing the
issues in support of our industry's position.
The biggest single issue which adversely affects the public's
perception
of our industry is hazardous waste disposal.
Notwith­
standing efforts by our member companies and an ongoing program
by CMA itself, the public perceives that they are at great risk
from chemical wastes.
The hazardous waste issue has such a grip
on the national consciousness that this single issue affects the
public's perception on other industry issues such as clean air and
clean water.
Later on today, I will have the opportunity to ad­
dress the public perception of hazardous waste issues as part of
a Waste Management Plan presentation to be considered by the
Executive Committee.
in closing, I would like to acknowledge the contribution of
individuals on our committee and thank you for contributing their
advice and counsel on the tough communications problems our
incustry is facing.
Their efforts continue to make a real contri­
bution to our program.
I also wish to acknowledge the efforts of
CMA's communications staff whose enthusiasm and commitment on
behalf of our industry is a key element in the progress we have
made in recent months.
CMA
CMA 038009
EXHIBIT G
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Advisory Committee Charter
Purpose
The Biomedical and Environmental Special Programs
Advisory Committee (SPAC) will ensure that all programs are
conducted in a manner consistent with CMA policy and with
the Special Programs Guidelines, review and make recommenda­
tions on all advocacy and research programs, coordinate the
activities of programs with appropriate CMA committees, and
advise the Executive Committee on the acceptance of new
programs and amendments to the charter of existing programs1.
Membership and Voting Procedures
SPAC will consist of nine members, including the
Chairman.
The members will be recommended by the President
of the Association and appointed by the Executive Committee
with the approval of the Board.
Each of the following CMA
committees will be represented:
Chemical Regulations Advisory Committee
Occupational Safety and Health Committee
Environmental Management Committee
Regulatory Impact Special Committee
The maximum term of the Chairman and individual gPAC
members will be three continuous years.
Membership in SPAC will
b terminated if a member does not attend at least two-thirds
of the total number of meetings during any twelve-month period.
A quorum will consist of a majority of SPAC members.
Each SPAC member has one vote and a decision shall be rendered
by a majority vote of the total membership.
In the event of a
tie vote, the Chairman's decision will be final.
Voting by
written proxy will be allowed.
SPAC will be reviewed by the Executive Committee
annually.
In cases of severe time constraints, an officer of CMA, with
notification of the SPAC chairman, can give interim approval
of new programs or modifications to an existing program.
CMA
CMA 038010
EXHIBIT H
THE INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS GROUP
REPORT TO THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
January 11, 1963
Presented by Dr. E. H. Blair
Tha Dow Chemical Company
The International Affairs Group (LAG) was formed by approval of the CMA
Board and of the SOOlA Board, in November 1979.
A record of the activities of IAG can be found in the minutes of the
Steering Committee meetings, and a copy of the Charter exists in the CMA
office, copies are available to those who wish to have one.
IAG is concerned with the international consequences of efforts by
national governments, groups of governments and/or international organi­
zations to manage the identification and control of chemical risks to
human health and the environment.
The U.S. chemical industry trade associations and their member companies
have actively supported a constructive domestic policy on the identifi­
cation and control of chemical risks to health and the environment. Such
matters may cross national borders, as does the flow of chemical
substances and chemical industry investment. There is growing inter­
national initiative in the health, safety and environmental arena. Thus,
it is necessary that the U.S. chemical industry via IAG develop and
support a constructive international policy to meet the need for
increased international understanding of, and commitment to, these
objectives.
During the past three years, IAG has held numerous meetings with the
European Council of Chemical Manufacturers Federations (CEFIC), com­
prises many national chemical industry trade associations, including
those for countries within the European Community. This past year
members of IAG traveled to Japan to conduct discussions on matters of
testing and control of chemical substances with the Japanese Chemical
Industry Association (JCIA), and through JCIA, the Ministries of
International Trade and Industry (MITI), and Health and Welfare, and
Labor.
In addition to the multiplicity of laws affecting the trade of chemicals
between various nations is the ever-increasing activity of supranational
bodies. These include the European Economic community (EEC), the
Organization of Economic Cooperation- and Development (OECD) Chemicals
Programme, the United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP), and a host
of technical and scientific programs that fall under various United
Nations and other global governmental programs.
CMA 038011
Possibly the most important evidence of IAG's activity is in the OECD
arena. At the recent High Level Meeting II, the United States succeeded
in its two- year attempt to avoid imposition of testing requirements for
new chemicals, in the form of OECD's minimum pre-marketing data set
(MPD). These requirements would have been placed on new chemicals prior
to manufacture in the U.S. for domestic use.
Under an agreement worked out November 15-17, spearheaded by EPA
Administrator, Anne Gorsuch, OECD delegations endorsed a U.S. proposal
that would allow individual OECD nations to select their own approaches
for reviewing new chemicals. This success is due, to a large part, to
IAG's activities working closely with those of OECD's Business and
industry Advisory Committee (BIAC), while in fact providing much of the
muscle and advocacy behind BXAC's positions to ensure that U.S.
industries were not shorted in the international arena. In effect, our
success at these recent OECD meetings means that the U.S. industry's
requirements for pre-manufacture notifications on new chemical sub­
stances will remain unchanged for the present. TSCA will not have to be
amended
in this respect because of international pressures and
commitments. Other agreements which the U.S. delegation obtained were:
Good laboratory practices to provide a reliable basis for
mutual acceptance of testing data.
Protection for confidential business information.
Agreement to consolidate and evaluate,
continue to expand OECD work on chemicals.
"Data interpretation Guides" for initial hazard assess­
ment of chemicals.
rather
than
we are now at the beginning of a 5-10 year experience in which the
Japanese requirements will co-exist with TSCA Section 5 law, with the
European Community base-set systems in its ten member states, and with
the OECD MPD system, as it is or will be implemented in other OECD
countries, such as Australia and possibly Canada.
I AG will have a major role in participating in this comparative
experience in the interest of international trade and against the
increasing demands for protectionism. If any changes in TSCA Section 5
are seen to have merit, on review of the next 5-10 years global
experience with new chemicals, IAG should have a critical role in that
evaluation.
Similarly, assessing the risk of existing chemicals will require
monitoring of the various national programs to minimize duplication, to
assure
that trade disincentives are not created,
and to speed
understanding of new information, testing procedures, etc. How much of
this IAG should or can do remains to be determined.
CMA 038012
international compliance programs where IAG can provide guidance
are those of labeling, waste disposal, occupational health, and possibly
transportation. Again, the extent and depth of LAG'S involvement in
these activities, in terms of participation with other domestic and
international chemical industry groups, needs to be determined.
Other
lAG's activity in the "confidentiality of identity" issue in the
European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemicals (EINECS) taught us
the importance of increasing direct contacts as early as possible with
the individual national chemical industry trade associations, while at
the same time coordinating with the regional groups, especially CEFIC.
This lesson can be used in the continuing aspects of this issue, now
directed at the PMN systems, and probably also in the several different
labeling systems which need to be made compatible and ultimately
harmonized. These conflicting systems are now developing in different
countries. Differences are evident in the methods by which chemicals are
classified by their delayed- effect hazards, such as cancer. The same is
true for the language used on labels to warn about these hazards. For
example, there is the potential of warning about a cancer hazard in
Europe, but not in the United States. The implications of this
difference for product liability are substantive. IAG has formed a Work
Group to develop a route to an international consensus on this question.
This group will coordinate with the AIHC and CMA's OSH Committee, as
well as counterpart organizations in the industry.
During the coming months and years, IAG must continue to formulate and
implement programs to deal with international chemical controls. We will
need to identify and analyze national and international health and
environmental issues of concern to the U.S. chemical industry. As rising
expectations and concerns develop worldwide on chemical contaminations,
w will need to develop positions responsive to these concerns, develop
strategy and action plans and use and coordinate appropriate industry
resources.
in managing these issues we must do more to establish and maintain
national and international relations necessary for effective dissemina­
tion and exchange of information. To do so means working with other
trade associations in the U.S. and in foreign lands, working with the
appropriate agencies and representatives of the U.S. .and foreign
governments, wherever appropriate, and with international organizations
such as UNEP, OECD, etc.
in our activities we continue to examine new channels for the flow of
information in order to identify issues and to develop positions on
these issues. As in the past, we will develop numerous position papers
where needed, reports and documents, and bring them to the attention of
foreign chemical industry trade associations, and, where necessary, to
continue our direct trade association personal contacts.
CMA 038013
-4In conclusion, there is much for IAG to do in the next 5-10 years. The
critical question remains, how to balance IAG resources and capabilities
with the needs as they develop. I and my associates will continue to
keep you informed on these matters and to seek help and guidance when
needed.
If you have any questions,
time.
I would be pleased to accept them at this
Thank you for your continued interest and support.
CMA
CMA 038014
EXHIBIT I
TREASURER’S REPORT
Seven Months Ending December 31, 1982
This report will be prepared and distributed following the end of
the month.
For your reference, the following is provided:
e
The originally approved and amended budget and funding for the
fiscal year beginning June 1, 1982 and ending May 31, 1983.
e
The approved budget for the separately funded Biomedical and
Environmental Special Program area as amended.
CMA
CMA 038016
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
ORIGINALLY APPROVED AND AMENDED BUDGET AND FUNDING FOR THE
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1982 and ending May 31, 1983
aEVENUE:
Membership Dues
Investment Revenue
Revenue from (or Dues Support to)
special Program Areas
Original
1982-83
Annual Budget
Amended
1982-83
Annual Budget
S 9,860,600
1,050,000
9,525,000
1,250,000
Full Use of Previously Accumulated
Communication Program Funds
Meetings (net of expenses)
TOTAL REVENUE
3,746,600
1,886,100
20,600
209r000
581,100
147,800
$14,809,300
$13,312,500
DIRECT PROGRAM ACTIVITIES:
General Counsel
Government Relations
International Trade Activities
state Activities Program
Chemical Industry's Communications Program
Technical Administration
Health, Safety fi Chemical Regulations
Environmental Activities
Distribution, Energy, Engineering
Chemtrec
Outside Legal Fees
Outside Consulting
TOTAL
971,700
800,700
246,100
251,200
4,963,900
273,600
780,400
737,600
450,100
642,500
1,600,000
795,000
884,400
755,500
231,100
333,500
3,565,900
266,300
711,100
699,900
400,900
618,000
1,600,000
795,000
$12,512,800
$10,861,600
513,100
499,300
492.200
452,200
TOTAL
TOTAL EXPENSES
$14,809,300
$13,067,600
MSS
UNALLOCATED MANAGEMENT AND GENERAL
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES:
Executive Department
Accounting 6 Business Services
Printing, Distribution, Computer ft
Information Services
Contribution to (Use of ) Reserves
| AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
Notes
244,900
146
The above budget and funding does n t include the activities and 16 staff of
the separately funded Biomedical and Bnvir run ntal Special Programs area.
-3CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
APPROVED BUDGET AND FUNDING FOR
BIOMEDICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fiscal Year Beginning June 1, 1982 and ending May 31, 1983
1982-83
Amended
REVENUE;
Overhead Reimbursement
Investment Revenue
Publication Sales
TOTAL REVENUE
225,000
1,000
902,500
EXPENSES:
Salaries fi Related Expense
Employee Benefits
Travel & Staff Training
Dues, Subscriptions & Publications
Outside Printing 6 Graphics
Meetings & Workshops
Direct Postage, Freight £ Delivery
Direct Supplies fi General Office
Taxes fi Insurance
Rent & Occupancy
Common Cost Expenses
Administrative Support:
Technical Administration
Accounting
Office of General Counsel
Printing fi Distribution
442,100
92,800
11,100
1,700
700
1,100
23.500
26,200
83.500
48,100
74.500
32.300
27.300
75,000
TOTAL
980,000
EXCESS REVENUE (EXPENSES)
•At its September meeting, the Executive Committee approved an increase in
authorized personnel to 16 principally because of the recently added
Methylenedianiline program, the cost of which will be recovered from per
hour program charges.
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
16
CMA 038017
EXHIBIT J
SPECIAL PROGRAMS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Objectives
SPAC will advise the Executive Committee on the
acceptance of new programs, ensure that all
programs are conducted in a manner consistent
with CMA policy and with the Special Programs
Guidelines, review and make recommendations
on all advocacy and research programs, and
coordinate the activities of programs with
their respective standing committees. Current
programs are:
Alkanolamines
Acrylonitrile
Allyl Chloride
Arsenic
Benzene
Butylated Hydroxytoluene
Chlorobenzenes
Epoxy Resins
Ethylene Dibromide
Ethylene Dichloride
Ethylene Oxide
Fluorocarbons
Glycol Ethers
Methylenedianilines
Ketones
Phosgene
Polychlorinated Biphenyl
Phthalate Esters
Rubber Additives
Styrene
Titanium Dioxide
Toluenediamines
Trichloroethylene
Vinyl Chloride
Vinylidene Chloride
Zinc Dialkyl Dithipphosphates
Recommendations
Extend authorization of SPAC for one year.
Impact
Money
Action Required
There will be no dues impact.
Company
Personnel:
One representative on the Committee
from each of 9 companies.
Staff
Personnel:
One staff executive coordinating
the work of the committee.
No
additional staff required.
Approval of recommendation.
CMA
CMA 038018
EXHIBIT
k
PROPOSED PROGRAM ON ALKANOLAMINES
Problem/Backqround*
In 1978 a feeding study conducted in Japan
indicated that triethanolamine is a suspect
carcinogen.
Review of this study by
industry scientists identified several areas
in which the study may be flawed, including
the possible formation of nitrosamines in
the test diet.
Nevertheless, cosmetics and
surfactant manufacturers have expressed a
concern over the Japanese data.
In
addition, triethanolamine has been nominated
to the National Toxicology Program for
testing in the areas of pharmacokinetics,
mutagenicity, reproduction and
carcinogenicity.
The four manufacturers of triethanolamin
reached agreement on a research program and
asked CMA to set up a Program on this
chemical.
Accordingly, the Special Programs
Division convened an exploratory meeting
where the group wrote a program charter and
tentative budget.
The Program was reviewed
and received favorable responses by the
Special Programs Advisory Committee (SPAC>
and CMA staff.
The Panel will conduct 14 and 90-day skin
painting studies on triethanolamine and
provide these •data’- to NTP.
In addition,
dermal metabolism studies may be conduct d.
Depending upon the results of the Panelsponsored studies and the proposed NTP
studies, the Panel may proceed to a dermal
carcinogenicity study.
Recommendations
The Executive Committee accept SPAC's
recommendation for approval for this
program.
Impact:
Money
Participating companies will support
program activities and necessary overhead
charges*
Company Personnel
One representative from each
participating company.
CMA Personnel
No additional staff required.
Action Required*
Approval of Recommendation.
CMA
CMA 038019
T
exhibit l
RESPONSE TO INQUIRY
What i3 the chemical industry's position on Public Compensation?
Our industry is committed to protecting the public from the
health and safety risks of chemicals and waste disposal sites.
Several government and private organizations have studied the
impact of chemicals and waste disposal sites on public health
but none has established on a scientific basis that there is a
broad health problem.
Therefore, the chemical industry strongly
supports and encourages continued data collection and analysis to
determine the extent of any possible health effects in this area.
Such data collection is already mandated by existing statute.
Until the nature and scope of this issue is better understood it
would be unwise to create a broad new public health compensation
system.
In the meantime, current compensation systems such as
Social Security, Worker's Compensation, the courts and private
insurance, should be adequate to protect individuals who may have
a legitimate basis for seeking relief.
The chemical industry is
prepared to cooperate in the collection, analysis and interpretation
of information needed to establish a sound understanding of the
health risks associated with waste sites.
J
1
Would your industry support the Asbestos Coalition Proposal?
The chemical industry will not support the chemical supplement
to the Asbestos Proposal.
Since data does not exist that indicates
any major health effects from chemicals it would be totally erroneous
to group chemicals, with their very different characteristics and
effects, together with asbestos.
Chemical Manufacturers Association
Board of Directors M etmg
CMA 038020
exhibit
M
MEMBER SERVICES DEPARTMENT
STATUS REPORT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
JANUARY 11,
1983
Member Services is two years old this month.
Since
the report of a year ago,
state chemical groups' activ­
ities
have accelerated.
At that time, there were eighteen
organizations with which we worked. Today there are 24 in
19 states.
The Iberville Chemical Industry Council was formed in
Louisiana. It, like the councils in River Parishes and Lake
Charles, serves in an autonomous satellite capacity to the
Louisiana Chemical Association.
A chemical industry committee, under the wing of the
Associated Industries of Kentucky, was organized in
November.
We now have relationships with two local councils in
Ohio — Cincinnati and Cleveland.
The Ohio Chemical Council
is working with them as independent satellites and hopes to
aid in the formation of other similar local groups.
An effort was made by companies to establish a group in
South Carolina. While well supported by a large majority of
concerned firms, the matter is now on hold. There was definite
opposition from a few companies who felt interests were being
served by the State Chamber of Commerce and the South Carolina
Textile Manufacturers Association. Marketing considerations
also were involved in the decision.
We are in a hand-holding stage with an ill-defined,
fledgling group in Wisconsin, which did send a representative
to the Second Annual Meeting of State Organizations in Chicago
last October.
States with viable organizations, excluding South Carolina
and Wisconsin, include:
Alabama, California, Connecticut,
Delaware, Louisiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Illinois, Missouri,
New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas,
Virginia and West Virginia.
Nearly every group either has greatly expanded its scope
of operations or is well along in planned expansions. Notable
examples are California, Illinois, Missouri and Ohio. All
groups, however, are concerned with the need to increase
CMA 038021
membership and institute a dues structure which will make
possible carrying out projects in support of their programs.
They are making ever greater use of CMA-generated mater­
ials and are calling on me and others in the CMA departments
for assistance. Similarly, they are now drawing progressively
more on each other -- exchanging information and copying
successful projects without any feeling of damaged proprietary
interests.
There has grown a sense of unity between state groups and
with CMA. The relationships are good, and they no longer feel
challenged or harbor the fear that CMA is attempting to take
them over.
The latter point, however, always must be borne
in mind.
There have been a few instances when CMA committee
members or staff have been perceived as dictating to a group.
These have been due to misunderstandings, at times on both
sides, and rather quickly corrected.
During the past year, 1 have met, on invitation, with the
boards of the Ohio and California Councils; committees of those
in Ohio and Louisiana; attended and spoke at the annual meetings of
councils in Louisiana, New Jersey, Texas and Ohio.
r
AGENDA
MEETING OF CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Monday and Tuesday, September 9-10, 1985
The Rltz Carlton (Ballroom IV Room)
Laguna Niguel, California
TAB
Call to Order and Approval of Minutes of
June 5-6, 1985, Meeting — Chairman Sella
Annual Report of the Environmental Manage­
ment Committee — Frank V. Berryman,
Chevron Chemical Company; Chairman, CMA
Environmental Management Committee
Analysis of Dlngell Survey on Air Emissions
and Emergency Response — Frank W. Berryman
Annual Report of the State Affairs Commit­
tee — Garth F. Fort, Monsanto Company;
Chairman, CMA State Affairs Conalttee
Special Report on the Status and Programs
of the State Chemical Industry Associa­
Pont de Nemours & Company; Chairman, CMA
Ad Hoc Chemical Industry Council Work Group
Annual Report of the Government Relations
Conalttee — Kenneth E. Davis, Rohm and
Haas Company; Chairman, CMA Government
Relations Committee
10:10-10:30
Tax Reform Legislation — William M. Bellamy,
Union Carbide Corporation; Chairman, CMA
Tax Policy Committee
10:30-11:10
11:10-11:30
Superfund Reauthorization:
a. Overview and Report on Association
Activities — William M. Stover
b. Legislative Status — Wells Denyes,
Eastman Kodak Company,* Chairman, CMA
Superfund Task Group
c. Communications Support -- Jon C. Holtzman
President's Report — Robert A. Roland
a. CHEMNET Status Report — Geraldine V. Cox
b. Association Program and Issue Report
11:30-12:00 -Noon
Viewing of New CMA Film:
Jon C. Holtzman
12:00 Noon
Adjournment
1
2
3
4
CMA 038290
TAB
Call to Order — Chairman Sella
Report of the Executive Committee —
Chairman Clark
Treasurer's Report — Gary C. Herman
Report of the Nominating Committee —
Chairman Sella
Annual Report of the Special Programs
Policy Committee -*■ Chairman Corless
Annual Report of the International Affairs
Group -- Thomas W. Mooney, The Procter
& Gamble Company; Vice Chairman, Inter­
national Affairs Group
International Trade Policy Issues: Consi­
deration of Executive Committee Recom­
mendations — Allan J. Spliner, Rohm and
Haas Company; Chairman, CMA International
Trade Committee
a. U.S./Canada Free Trade Agreement
b. Multilateral Trade Negotiations on
Chemical Tariff Cutting
10:20-10:35
Protection of Groundwater Quality Policy:
Consideration of Executive Committee
Recommendations — Frank V. Berryman,
Chevron Chemical Company; Chairman, CMA
Environmental Management Committee
10:35-11:00
Annual Report of the Energy Cosnlttee —
Gary S. Furman, American Cyanamid
Company; Chairman, CMA Energy Committee
Annual Report of the Engineering Advisory
Cosnlttee — Ray E. Olsen, Exxon Chemical
Company; Chairman, CMA Engineering
Advisory Cosnlttee
11:25-11:50
Post Institute Issue Is^act — Robert A.
Roland
11:50-12:00
New Business
12:00 Noon
Adjournment
CMA 038291
r
2291
MINUTES of the three hundred fourth meeting of the Board of Directors of the
Chemical Manufacturers Association, Inc., held at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel (Ball­
room IV), Laguna Niguel, California, on Monday at 8:00 a.m. and Tuesday at
9:00 a.m., September 9 and 10, 1985. There were present:
Directors:
George J. Sella, Jr. - Chairman
Harold A. Sorgenti - Vice Chairman
Robert A. Roland - President
Arthur E. Biggs
Hans H. Kopper
Robert D. Cadleux
Sidney M. Leahy
Carlyle G. Caldwell
Carl W. Lorentzen
Paul V. Chellgren
Robert H. Malott
H. Eugene McBrayer
Harry Corless
Keith R. McKennon
Ralph S. Cunningham
Robert L. Mitchell
Keith H. Edmondson (l)
L. John Polite
Seymour S. Preston, III
F. Jack Fitzgerald
Thomas E. Reilly, Jr.
Robert C. Forney
M. Whitson Sadler
Charles E. Stewart
S. Jay Stewart
John U. Johnstone, Jr.
Robert D. Kennedy
Konrad M. Weis
Secretary:
Treasurer:
General Counsel:
Charles W. Van Vlack
Gary C. Herman
David Zoll
By Invitation:
Stuart T. Allen, SOCMA, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
William M. Bellamy, Jr., Union Carbide Corporation
Frank W. Berryman, Chevron Chemical Company
Geraldine V. Cox, CMA
Kenneth E. Davis, Rohm and Haas Company (1)
Wells Denyes, Eastman Kodak Company
Garth F. Fort, Monsanto Company
Gary S. Furman, American Cyanamld Company
Edward D. Griffith, ARCO Chemical Company
Jon C. Holtzman, CMA
E. Hamilton Hurst, Nalco Chemical Company
Thomas W. Mooney, The Procter & Gamble Company (2)
Ray E. Olsen, Exxon Chemical Company
Allan J. Spilner, Rohm and Haas Company
William M. Stover, CMA
Juliane H. Van Egmond, American Cyanamld Company
James P. Watkins, American Cyanamld Company
(1) Monday only
(2) Tuesday only
CMA 038292
2292
Monday> September 9, 1985
MINUTES OF LAST MEETINGS
Chairman Sella called the meeting to order at 8:00 a.m. The minutes of
the June 5 and 6, 1985 Board meetings vere approved as distributed.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
A summary of the committee's annual report Is attached as Exhibit A.
DINGELL SURVEY ON AIR EMISSIONS
Mr. Berryman reviewed the results of the survey on air emissions and
emergency response capabilities and practices. Key findings of the survey included:
A significant amount of safety equipment and procedures are in place.
The industry has a very active inspection and safety review program.
Air emission measuring apparatus and techniques are In place or
applied near the .process unit rather than at the fenceline or in the
community.
There Is substantial operator input (human factor) in most of these
monitoring and safety systems.
The report will be delivered to Congressman Dlngell later in September
following completion and final review of the contractors' analysis of the data.
There was considerable discussion concerning the ultimate public release of the
report and the Individual company's ability to be able to effectively respond to
the issues that might be raised.
STATE AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
The comnlttee's annual report, supplemented with Chairman Fort's report.
Is attached as Exhibit B.
STATE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS
Mr. Wood presented the report (Exhibit C) of an ad hoc group which had
studied the status and programs of the various state chemical Industry ass clations. Mr. Wood highlighted the following findings and recommendations:
The 18 state groups represent a significant resource to the industry.
CMA has done a good job In the past 4-5 years In nurturing and
supporting these groups.
CMA 038293
2293
CMA needs Co continue co evaluate and find appropriate ways to
utilize the resource chat these groups represent, while recognizing
chat some states will always be able to do more chan others.
Member company senior executives need to provide strong, top down
personal and corporate support for these groups.
Some additional expenditure of CMA resources in the form of seed
money would be desirable.
There was considerable discussion of the relative strengths of the state
organizations, the need for additional state groups, and the role of the Board and
the individual Directors in moving these programs forward and in resolving any
problems or shortfalls in company involvement. The view was expressed that the
Board and the Individual Directors feel the need to have continuing input, as
appropriate, on those areas where their action, either individually or collec­
tively, is warranted. Mr. Roland indicated that there would be appropriate
follow-up action based on the data in the report and the Board's request.
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS COMMITTEE
A summary of the committee's annual report is attached as Exhibit D.
TAX REFORM LEGISLATION
Mr. Bellamy's report is attached as Exhibit E.
CMA activities including:
He highlighted several
The preparation of two tax studies on effective tax rates (Price
Waterhouse) and on the economic Impact of the Administration's
Completion of a series of issue papers.
A program of contacts with Ways and Means Committee members.
Following his presentation, there was discussion of how active the
Association should be on the tax reform issue and where it should be ranked in the
overall list of Association priorities. Further discussion was deferred to the
Executive Committee meeting that afternoon.
SUPERFUND REAUTHORIZATION
a. Association Activities.
Mr. Stover presented an overview of
Association activities with respect to Superfund reauthorlzation.
b. Legislative Status.
Mr. Denyes' report is attached as Exhibit F.
He highlighted pending action on the Senate floor on S. 51 and in the House Ways
and Means, and Public Works and Transportation Committees. Following his presenta­
tion, there was discussion of the senior executive assignments to visit key Members
CMA 038294
2294
of Congress and che points which would be made during those visits. Further
discussion of Association strategies was deferred to the Executive Committee
meeting.
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
Hr. Roland's report is attached as Exhibit G. Dr. Cox presented a
status report on CHEMNET's implementation which has 41 companies signed on and is
scheduled to begin operations in October. Hr. Zoll reported on the August CHA
conference on insurance and its findings. He discussed possible avenues of CMA
Involvement other than the formation of a captive Insurance company and requested
input from the Board on what direction the CHA effort should take. Hr. Stover
reported on the pending Conference Committee action regarding reauthorizatlon of
the Clean Water Act. Hr. Holtzman described the upcoming open meeting of the
Communications Comtlttee on CAER. Hr. Roland reported on plans and programs for
the October Chemical Industry Conference.
The Board adjourned until 9:00 a.m.
Tuesday, September 10.
Tuesday, September 10, 1985
"CLEANING UP” FILH
Prior to the beginning of the formal meeting, the recent CHA film
entitled "Cleaning Up" was presented for those Directors who had expressed inter­
est.
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COHMITTEE
Chairman Clark reported on the items discussed and actions taken by the
Executive Committee the preceding day. Chairman Clark indicated that che Execu­
tive Committee's rccommendstlons on those subjects coming before the Board would
be reported following presentation of each agenda item, but prior to the request
for final action. He reported that the Executive Committee took the following
actions:
Approved four standing committee and LAG appointments.
Recommended for Board action the Nominating Committee's report.
Approved revisions to the Special Programs Policy Comittee Charter,
Principles and Operating Guidelines.
Recommended for Board action the proposed position on a possible
U.S./Canada Free Trade Agreement.
Deferred the proposed position on multilateral trade negotiations
(MTN) on chemical tariff cutting, pending further review by the
International Trade Committee.
CMA 038295
2295
Recommended for Board action the proposed position on the protection
of groundwater quality.
Requested the Environmental Management Committee to revise its
proposal on an Association policy and program for air toxics.
Discussed Superfund reauthorization strategies and reiterated the
Importance of the senior executive congressional visits.
Discussed the impact of recent chemical incidents on the
Association's activities, including a request to fund the CAER and
CRC programs. The funding request was referred to the Finance
Committee. Other areas reported as impacted were plant safety, air
toxics and risk perception and acceptance.
Discussed the tax reform issue and its relative priority. Agreed
that it should be a high priority issue, but that it should noc
divert Association resources from Superfund and therefore should be
addressed utilizing principally member company personnel. Requested
that an appropriate action plan be prepared.
TREASURER'S REPORT
Mr. Herman reported on the most current financial report available
which covered the first two months of the fiscal year through July 31. In this
period the Association had revenue of $11,734,000 and expenses of $1,709,500. As
of September 3, dues had been received from all but nine members. Follow-up is
continuing and no problem is anticipated at this time with respect to payment by
those companies.
He also reported that as
the Association's budgeted outside
earlier than normal. In addition,
support the two tax policy studies
indicated by Mr. Berryman on the previous day,
consulting funds are being committed somewhat
$65,000 has been transferred internally to
which Mr. Bellamy reported on the previous day.
REPORT OF THE NOMINATING COMMITTEE
Reporting as Chairman of the Nominating Committee, Mr. Sella presented a
nomination to fill a vacancy on the Board of Directors caused by the resignation
of Richard J. Mahoney of the Monsanto Company.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED: That F. Jack Fitzgerald, Executive
Vice President, Chemicals, Plastics and
Fibers, Monsanto Company be elected as a
Director through May 31, 1986.
CMA 038296
2296
SPECIAL PROGRAMS POLICY COMMITTEE
Mr. Corless presented the annual report of the Special Programs Policy
Committee. He indicated the special programs area is generally operating well,
although there are several areas that need further attention, and that CMA offers
many advantages to those companies desiring to establish special program activi­
ties.
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS GROUP
A summary of the group's annual report is attached as Exhibit H.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE ISSUES
a. U.S./Canada Free Trade Agreement
Mr. Spllner presented a
proposed position on a possible bilateral free trade agreement between the United
States and Canada. Mr. Clark indicated that the Executive Committee had recom­
mended the position for Board approval.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED: That the proposed position state­
ment as presented by Mr. Spllner and as
set forth in Exhibit I be approved.
b. MTN Chemical Tariff Cutting
Mr. Spllner presented background
on a position statement regarding possible across-the-board chemical tariff
reductions in the next round of multilateral trade negotiations (MTN) which
position had been presented to the Executive Committee the previous day. He
highlighted the areas of concern raised by the Executive Committee which will
require further review.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED: That without prejudice to the
original proposal, the International
Trade Committee review the issue in light
of the concerns raised by the Executive
Committee and bring forward a revised
proposal at the October meeting.
Board members were urged to provide their written comments on the MTN
Issue to the International Trade Committee as soon as possible.
GROUNDWATER QUALITY
Mr. Berryman also presented an overview of CMA's overall groundwater
program and activities which is attached as Exhibit J-l.
CMA 038297
2297
Mr. Berryman presented a proposed position on the protection of groundwater quality which had been endorsed, with amendments, by the Executive Committee
the previous day.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED: That the position on the protec­
tion of groundwater quality, as set forth
in Exhibit J-2, be approved.
ENERGY COMMITTEE
18
The committee's annual report, supplemented by Chairman Furman's report,
is attached as Exhibit K.
ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The committee's annual report, supplemented by Chairman Olsen's report,
is attached as Exhibit L. Following the report, there was considerable discussion
of the feasibility of sharing accident information among companies and of provid­
ing analysis of longstanding industry practices which should be reviewed. It was
agreed that the Engineering Advisory Committee and the Health and Safety Committee
would examine these areas for possible action.
PRESIDENT'S REPORT
Mr. Roland reported on the impact on CMA issues of the recent incidents
at Institute and other locations. He Indicated that there were four major areas
where ha believed the Association needed to focus Its efforts to meet the
heightened concern and potential legislative or regulatory activity. These areas
'included:
Full and aggressive implementation of the CAER and NCRIC programs
Plant and process safety
Air toxics
Risk perception and acceptance.
Vith respect to the CAER and NCRIC programs, Mr. Roland reported that a
proposal to staff and fund the CAER and Chemical Referral Center (CRC) programs
for the remainder of the fiscal year had been referred to the Finance Committee
for further review prior to the October Executive Committee and Board meetings.
With respect to the plant safety issue, it was agreed that closer
liaison with the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) was necessary,
ft was also agreed that the Health and Safety Committee and the Engineering
Advisory Committee are working on expanded activities in this area.
CMA 038298
2298
With respect Co the risk perception and acceptance Issue, Mr. Roland
Indicated that we would have to look for new and creative ways to communicate
effectively with the public.
NEW BUSINESS
a. Clean Sites Inc.
Dr, Forney presented an update on Clean
Sites Inc. activities and accomplishments. He also reported on the need to find a
senior Industry executive for CSI before the end of the year and he urged Board
members to submit candidates' names to Dr. Fernandez who Is heading up the search
effort.
b. Tax Reform
Mr. Malott urged that CMA take the lead on key
chemical Industry Issues, such as capital cost recovery and International competi­
tiveness, as the tax reform debate accelerates. Mr. Sella Indicated that the
Executive Committee was In agreement that this was a priority issue and that a
work plan based on a high degree of member company participation would be brought
forward.
c. Superfund
The Importance of the assigned congressional visits
by the Directors was emphasized as was the need to coordinate and report on those
visits to CMA's Government Relations Department. There was additional discussion
of the Association's posture in the final weeks of the Superfund debate. The
Importance of maintaining solidarity In the approved CMA policy positions was
stressed.
e
e
On motion, duly made and seconded, the meeting was adjourned at 12 noon.
Charles U. Van Vlack
Corporate Secretary
Chairman, CMA Board of Directors
CMA 038299
EXHIBIT A
REPORT OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
September 9, 1985
executive summary
MAJOR ACCOMPLISHMENTS
The Environmental Management Conittae's 1984-1985 year van once again
full* diversified, and productive. The Committee effectively and
successfully managed environental Matter* before regulatory agencies,
Congress, federal courts, and the public. In addition, the WC is
working closely with the State Affairs Committee to address evolving
a%ate environmental issues. A description of the IMC's major
accomplishments is set forth in Qiapter Z. A swaary of these
accomplishments includes >
o The 2MC, in conjunction with the Government Relations Committee
has actively advocated reauthorisation and appropriate amendment of the full spectrum of enviroimmntal legislation ~
superfund, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
the Safa Drinking water Act, Clean Air Act, and Clean Water
Act. The end result of the 1984-85 efforts was a comprehensive
amendment of RCRA. CMA efforts resulted in significant
modifications to the RCRA amandsents to make several require­
ments more palatable. We hevei
(1) proposed sound legisla­
tive alternatives; (2) promoted aendaents that assure costeffective requirements; and (3) have opposed amendments that
impose unjustified restraints on industry operation and
potential growth or those that offer little or no commensurate
environmental benefits. At this time, there is a
real likelihood that mendments to the Clean Water Act,
Superfund, and the safe Drinking Water Act will be enacted
this year.
o One of the key elements of CMA's haxardous waste management
program is to establish industry trends in member company
hazardous waste disposal practices. To achieve this objec­
tive the OIC conducted for the third year, a survey of
waste disposal practices for 1983, and is managing a similar
survey for 1984* The three year survey results show very
favorable disposal practice trends. The survey results have
proven to be a vary valuable element in OtA's Superfund
legislative and communications progrms, and as a part of the
full spectrum of solid waste advocacy activities.
o During the past year, the rapidly escalating issue of air
toxics has taken up an increased level of activity and has
great significance to the DIC and the industry in the past
year. The IMG managed a survey requested by Congressman
Dingell on monitoring and detection systems for chemicals and
emergency respons systems at chenieel industry plants. In a
CMA 038300
rwlated uptcti the EMC has established an ad hoe group to
davalop a comprehensive work plan for air toxics. Although wa
ara still in tha initial phasas of this activity CMA's efforts
hava already begun to obtain results. Wa ware prepared to
address in a constructive yat forceful nature tha first of what
could be a series of legislative proposals on air toxics
enissions. This activity will be one of tha critical issues
CMA/IMC will be addressing in the next few years.
o A second area of increased activity is in the groundwater
area. The EMC has had in place for the past year an Ad Hoc
Groundwater coordinating Coesaittaa to assure overall coordina­
tion of CMA ccsmittee activities in implementing CMA's
groundwater work plan. The implementation of the work plan is
necessary to address groundwater related issues at both the
state and federal level. CMA's activities have been
effective in assuring that the reauthorization of the Safe
Drinking water Act does not became the vehicle for addressing
groundwater issues. CMA is viewed by members of Congress,
and ZPA as being in the forefront on groundwater matters and
is looked to by other industry groups to play a leadership
role.
o CMA continues to promote a reasonable implementation of the
existing and recently mended PCRA hazardous waste require­
ments. One of the key EMC activities was to conduct three
educational seminars on the new RCM amewhants, and compliance
with PCRA substantive and procedural requirements• The
seminars were held in conjunction with the Council of Chemical
Associations. On the regulatory issues, CMA efforts have been
primarily geared to assure that technically sound ACRA regular
tions are being developed in a timely fashion. Of specific
concern are IPA's regulations for implementing the land
disposal ban requirements. In light of the new AC PA regulatory
requirements, we anticipate a vary high level of activity of
the ACAA Regulations Task Group in addressing the new imple­
menting regulations to assure that they are needed, technically
characteristics, and transport of contaminants.
Ebr states where groundwater
quantity is a concern, this may not be separable from the quality issue. States
may choose to regulate the withdrawal of groundwater as may be appropriate to
protect groundwater quality as part of its state groundwater quality protection
program. CMA does not see a federal role in state evaluation of water quality
impacts of withdrawal programs and statutes.
Under some circumstances, such as in vulnerable hydrogeological areas,
state or local governments may choose to implement planning of the use of the
Land (for future activities) overlying the aquifer or the recharge zone to
assure protection of groundwater quality. Land use and soils information should
be used in conjunction with aquifer mapping to develop appropriate land use
management decisions. Such controls may include zoning restrictions,
requirements for septic tank placement, requirements for the siting of new
facilities where potential adverse impacts from groundwater contamination are
especially significant, restrictions on other activities related to land use
that may potentially affect groundwater quality.
CMA 038393
T
Tha federal government should continue to usist states In the development
Guidance and technical assistance
lating land uses, hydrogeology and soils with potential groundwater impacts
Kill also assist stats and local government in making land use decisions where
necessary. CMA believes the federal government should not involve Itself in
land use decisions.
f ^quifar mapping and soils information.
Where point source discharges to groundwater are not currently permitted
under existing regulations, states may choose to incorporate a permit system
under their groundwater quality protection progrms to regulate discharges to
groundwater. Where a permit system is employed, CMA endorses the use of permits
with performance-based limits and conditions.
CMA
i
CMA 038394
T
energy committee annual report
1985 - 1986
PRESENTED
TO
THE BOARD OP DIRECTORS
OP
THE CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
GARY S. FURMAN
CHAIRMAN
SEPTEMBER 10, 1985
CMA 038395
INTRODUCTION
relative to other CMA issues, energy is not a major concern at
this time.
Crude oil prices have dropped.
Fuel oil prices
have remained stable.
Natural gas prices have declined.
The
supply of oil, gas, coal and electricity is not a current
problem.
Under this type of environment the Energy
Committe®'5 charter "to ensure equal access at competitive
prices to supplies of feedstocks and energy" moves in the
direction of stewardship.
The meeting schedule has been
reduced and we have worked to establish energy-oriented ad hoc
coalitions as a cost effective means of promoting CMA energy
positions.
Despite this apparently benign energy environment, issues
remain that can impact the chemical industry now and in the
future.
• Comprehensive gas legislation is unlikely this year but
some form of gas legislation may come up as an amendment.
• The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)- has become
the battleground for key gas issues not requiring
legislation, such as transportation, pricing, access to
supply, and establishment of an interstate competitive gas
market.
• The government's search for additional revenue continues,
thus the possibility of new energy taxes.
• Efforts are under way to establish- protectionist trade
barriers for refined petroleum products.
• Traditional cost-based pricing of electricity is being further
challenged before the FERC in the proposed rule making for
electricity.
• Increased government energy data collection is likely.
I
CMA 038396
2
t
ORGANIZATION AND ISSUES 1985 - 1986
The Energy Committee was reorganized at its June 20-21 planning
meeting to address the anticipated energy issues through four task
groups. Natural Gas, Energy Taxes, Petroleum and Technical Issues
which includes electricity, energy conservation and government
reporting.
f
* Natural Gas Issues
f
In the fourth quarter of 1984, CMA successfully opposed
Congressional legislation to reregulate natural gas.
This
marked the last serious legislative effort in natural gas,
and no comprehensive gas legislation is likely this year.
There is, however, always the risk of fragmented natural gas
legislation as amendments to other bills. Since deregulation >
January 1, 1985 of approximately 50% of wellhead gas pricing
under the Natural Gas Policy Act, the battleground for gas
has shifted to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission '
I
(FERC). Because of the quasi-legal atmosphere and the
associated high cost, CMA established procedures
for cooperative efforts with other industrial gas consumer
groups involving the shared use of outside legal counsel in
responding to a broad public inquiry by the Federal En rgy
Regulatory Commission on natural gas transmission and
pipeline ratemaking. The FERC will decide this matter
I
in the fourth quarter of this year.
Objectives for 1985 - 1986
The CMA will continue to advocate legislation which will
bring about a free market and enhanced supply; i.e.,
deregulation of wellhead ceiling prices and removal of all
market restraints. The major effort, however, will b
directed to FERC regulatory reform to enhance natural gas
market competition which by its nature is dependent upon
equal access and transportation of natural gas supplies.
Stake;
Assurance of natural gas as a source of energy and
feedstocks on a competitive price basis. Foster
Associates, a natural gas consultant, has conservatively
estimated a possible impact of $.25/MMBTU or $750 million
per year on CMA member companies from the pricing
provisions of the current FERC Docket on regulatory refora >
of natural gas.
CMA 038397
3
Natural Gas Task Group Projects for 1985 - 1986 include:
Continue participation in FERC Docket No. RM85-1 on
natural gas regulatory reform, and develop CMA responses
to subsequent related FERC actions; particular attention
will be given to generic or precedent-setting issues such
as equal access to all gas (particularly the Outer
Continental Shelf [OCS]), pipeline ratemaking, and
curtailment priorities that may not be settled in Docket
Continue support for correcting legislative deficiencies
under the Natural Gas Policy Act and removal of
incremental pricing and prohibitions against the use of
natural gas.
Coordinate with other trade groups and support appropriate
coalition actions consistent with CMA's position and goals.
Energy Tax Issues
The CMA in the first half of 1985 successfully opposed an
attempt to implement an oil import fee as part of th
federal budget deficit reduction package. The Energy
Committee provided focus and technical support to th CMA
Tax Policy and Government Relations Committees during this
campaign. Congressional leaders, though divided, hav
continued to demonstrate a willingness to consider some
form of energy taxation as a means to generate revenue
during the coming year.
Objectives for 1985 - 1986
Avoid any new energy-tax-based revenue-generating scheme.
If such a tax is imposed, limit the impact on energy and
exclude feedstock.
Stake: A tax of $5/bbl. on oil has been estimated by the
consultant firm of Data Resources, Inc.(DRI) to decrease
chemical production by at least 5t and eliminate 15,000
chemical jobs per year through 1990.
Energy Tax Group Projects 1985 - 1986 include:
• Maintain the capability to analyze and develop respons s
to various energy tax proposals and studies.
CMA 038398
4
* Coordinate Energy Committee analyses and recommendations
with those of CMA Tax Policy and Government Relations
Committees.
* Carry the CMA position to appropriate divisions and
agencies within the Administration and to the Congress.
* Coordinate with other trade groups, and support
appropriate coalition action consistent with CMA's
position and goals.
Petroleum Issues
The CMA position is that market forces, as opposed to
price and allocation controls, are the most ffective
means to distribute petroleum products in the event of a
declared emergency. CMA's position prevailed in the
extension of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) by
Congress.
The CMA must be watchful in the coming'year
that the development of regulations to implement the
recent legislation do not nibble away at the fre market
concept.
In addition, protection from low-priced for ign imports
is being sought by a coalition of mostly small refiners
through the imposition of import quotas and/or import
fees.
Objectives for 1985 - 1986
The CMA will resist any effort to modify Department of
Energy regulatory policy and procedure away from the
current free market concepts.
In addition, the CMA will continue to oppose efforts to
create additional protectionist trade barriers which
would raise the cost of U. S. petrochemical raw
materials above world competitive levels.
Stake:
Availability of hydrocarbon raw materials and fuels at
competitive prices.
Petroleum Issues Projects for 1985 - 1986 includ :
• Maintain liaison with the DOE Cabinet Council, Congress,
the National Petroleum Council, and related trade
associations.
CMA 038399
5
* Develop responses on petroleum issues consistent with
the CMA position.
* Support appropriate coalition actions consistent with
CMA's position and goals.
Technical Issues
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is
reviewing electrical energy rate setting for the
interstate grid in its notice of inquiry, FERC Docket No.
85-17, Phase 1 and 2. The CMA joined with other trade
groups to advocate the continuance of cost of service
as the basis for rate design.
Public hearings and rule
making are expected in the fourth quarter of this year.
In addition, the Department of Energy plans to conduct a
survey of plant Manufacturing Energy Consumption
(MECS). The CMA has already testified and responded to
the Energy Information Administration (EIA) proposals '
for its MECS survey as to burden, sensitivity of
information, and its potential misuse. The EIA plans to
pursue a pilot survey in late 1985 and a full survey in
1986. It is the intent of the EIA to use this
information in responding to energy planning initiatives
by branches of the government.
Objectives for 1985 - 1986
The CMA will continue to seek cost of service as the
basis for electric rate design.
In addition, the CMA will continue to oppose unnec ssary
energy reporting.
Stake:
The FERC in Docket 85-17 will consider marginal cost
pricing. & O.li per KWH increase in rates would cost
CMA companies $85 million per year (based on 1984 CMA
member-company usage of 85 billion kilowatt hours).
In completing the MECS survey, individual plants could
incur up to $5,000 in additional reporting costs. The
ElA's intent to project energy usage from historic data
could give incorrect conclusions when responding to
government inquiries such as allocation controls.
CMA 038400
6
Technical Issues Task Group Projects for 1985 - 1986
include:
• Maintain technical liaison with the Electricity
Consumers Resource Council (ELCON) and the Electric
Power Research Institute (EPRI).
• Evaluate and recommend CMA responses to positions taken
by ELCON and EPRI.
Work through the Office of Management and Budget to
prevent or, if need be, modify the proposed EIA/MECS
survey.
Promote and support appropriate coalition activity
consistent with CMA's position and goals.
The effectiveness of the Energy Committee is the direct result of
the support derived from the participating member-company
personnel. As Chairman, I appreciate their talent and need th ir
dedication to meet the objectives set by the 1985 - 1986 Energy
Committee.
CMA 038401
REPORT OF THE ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE
TO THE CMA BOARD OF DIRECTORS
SEPTEMBER TO, 1985
Good morning. I'm delighted to have this opportunity to talk a
little bit about the Engineering Advisory Committee. Your program book
contains our formal report and I don't intend to go over that in detail.
I will use one or two specific examples from that report to illustrate
some points I would like to make and, of course, will do my best to
answer any
questions it engenders - or questions arising from anything
else, for that matter. But I would like to editorialize a bit upon the
bare listing of specific activities to leave with you the following ideas.
First, EAC's major role, namely that of dealing with codes and
standards, is an advocacy activity. Although it is not the type of ad­
vocacy you
will read about very often on the front page of the New York
Times, and
it may or may not be dealingwith a government entity, it is
nevertheless an advocacy not dissimilar to CMA's main thrusts.
The second important thought is that CMA is uniquely positioned
to perform that advocacy. In discussing this point. I'd like to take you
through the criteria EAC uses in selecting the tasks where that advocacy
is an essential element and lead you to the final thought, namely, that
the EAC activities have a high payout for a very modest expenditure.
To those who are not close to standards activities, it might
seem that setting standards should be a straightforward technical job, or
pure science If you will, about as controversial as 2 + 2 • 4; that the
only problem should be to arrive at the best technical solution to which
all rational experts would readily subscribe___ Oh, would that It were so
It is perhaps appropriate to spend just a few minutes to refresh
our memories on the general framework of the standards system. In the
U.S., standards are "voluntary" or "consensus", although in many in­
stances one or more governmental jurisdictions give them the force of law
after they are prepared - The National Electric Code is a classic ex­
ample. As a voluntary standard it represents good engineering practice.
But all or parts of It have also been enacted into law by virtually every
local, state and federal governmental body involved with the regulation
of either construction or personal safety,...from local building codes to
OSHA.
The umbrella organization for the voluntary standards system Is
the American National Standards Institute, known as ANSI for short. ANSI
does not write any standards! What it does do Is oversee the consensus
process. When 1 £ deternrlnes there has been a reasonable opportunity for
all interested parties to voice a contribution and that all valid objec-
CMA 038402
2
tions have been either resolved or adjudicated, it will "adopt" the
document as an ANSI standard. There are perhaps 30 or 40 thousand of
such ANSI Standards. Of these, I would guess that something in the range
of 5 to 7 thousand are of direct or indirect interest to the chemical in­
dustry.
In addition, there are many standards of interest that have
never gone through the "ANSI-fication" process. Just to name one, the
standard of the Tubular Exchanger Manufacturer's Association or TEMA,
which forms the backbone for most of the industry's shell and tube heat
exchanger purchases, remains as a manufacturer's agreement, not ANSI
document.
How then do standards get into the ANSI system?
There are
several acceptable procedures. The three most comnon are: (1) consensus
conmittee, (2) accredited organization or (3) canvass.
The consensus
conmittee approach was originally predominant in the ANSI system.
In
using this path, an adhoc committee is convened, inherently containing
consensus, that is, the conmittee members are carefully selected to
represent parties of interest—classically manufacturers, users, techni­
cal experts, the public and any special interests. The committee's out­
put is subjected to public comment, and when all negative conments have
been resolved, the document Is adopted as a standard. Many of our basic
process industry engineering standards were developed in this fashion,
for example, B31 Process Piping, B16-Flanges, 878 AYS pumps, etc.
However, this mode is gradually shifting over to other forms. Major in­
put to the content of such standards must come primarily from parti­
cipating on the working conmittee. At the moment, CMA/EAC has only four
representatives to such conmittees, so you can see we have been highly
selective. Over the years, member company direct participation has been
high In such activities and still forms the backbone of chemical industry
input.
It is only where member company direct participation cannot
accomplish the goals that CMA participation is undertaken. Most often
this occurs when only organizations, not individuals or companies are
admitted to membership. I'll say more about this subject a little later.
The second procedure recognized by ANSI is that of the ac­
credited organization. Here ANSI certifies that the procedures of the
sponsoring organization provide for achieving consensus.
Essential
elements Include public access to the work and requires broad based com­
mittee participation, notification requirements, rights of appeal,
recordkeeping, and mechanisms to resolve any conflict. Many of our most
used standards are developed this way, including the ASME Boiler and
Pressure Vessel Code and our favorite example - the National Electric
Code which is under the aegis of the National Fire Protection Association
CMA 038403
In many aspects it is difficult to perceive the differences
between the consensus coumittee and the accredited organization. Work on
the NEC for example is carried out by 20 code-making panels, each of
about 25 members plus an equal number of alternates. CMA-EAC partici­
pates on the 15 panels which most closely affect the chemical industry
(26 total representatives, provided by member companies at member company
expense). Code panel composition includes representation from equipment
manufacturers, government officials, trade unions, technical societies,
the building industry, contractors, consumer advocates, metal industries,
insulation manufacturers, other trade associations (NEMA, BTC), vendors,
the utility industry and probably others I missed as I skinmed the list.
The motivations in such a diverse group obviously differ. There are many
opportunities for honest differences of technical opinion, based on the
diverse perspectives represented - that after all, is what the consensus
system is all about. But it is also possible for pet ideas, or even
special Interests, to be pressed beyond the point of justification.
Just one example. At the last revision of the NEC, certain
interests sought to include a requirement for a motor disconnect switch
physically at each motor - offering as justification the safety of
persons working on the motor. For most users, this is a matter of in­
difference. Not so in the process Industries where such a local switch
would normally have to be explosion proof. It is CMA's position that
current tag and lockout procedures on remote disconnect devices provide
demonstrably adequate protection and that the proposal creates greater
safety hazards than the one It is Intended to correct. If the proposal
were adopted, we estimated the cost to CMA member companies at 40 MS/yr,
based on the then current rate of new construction. Although the amount
of new construction varies, we observe that the normal time interval
between adoption of a
standard for safety applicable only to new con­
struction and the first voice
of regulation suggesting retrofit is
generally measured In milliseconds. In this case, no estimate of retro­
fit cost has been made.
One feature of the ANSI system, Intended to minimize obsoles­
cence, is that each standard must be revised or reaffirmed within a 3
year interval. The proposal on motor disconnects was turned back at the
working conmlttee level for both the 1981 and 1984 versions of the NEC.
Current activities are
aimed at the 1987 NEC. Once again the proposal
has failed sufficient committee support for adoption (tie vote). How­
ever, this time appeal has brought It forth for public comnent, prepara­
tory to a floor fight at the NFPA convention. The Immediate task at hand
is to encourage sufficient "public" conment to lay the foundation for a
successful floor fight If It Is carried that far. The electrical task
group Is currently organizing such a campaign among member companies and
other sympathizers. The NFPA membership assembled in convention Is the
CMA 038404
court of ultimate appeal in so far as technical content of the NEC is
concerned.
Although members of the NFPA are obviously interested in
safety, only a small percentage will be technically versed in matters
electrical.
I think the parallels with other forms of advocacy are
obvious.
It is also obvious that a single decision does not make a
threat go away. Like bad pennies, these things keep coming back and back!
In addition to the consensus committee and accredited organi­
zation modes of adoption, there is a third In frequent use - the canvass
method. Here the document is prepared by non-representative means, then
submitted for public comment and acceptance. All negatives must be re­
solved.
Typical organizations using this approach include the Under­
writers Laboratories, the API, and our old friends, the National Board of
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors. Most of the activities from this
source (with the exception of the National Board) are less demanding on
the committee, per se, but do Impact on CMA staff. Continued partici­
pation however, is a necessary prerequisite to our credibility when
claiming to represent the chemical manufacturing industry in other
matters.
Let me turn away from the ANSI tutorial to the question of how
EAC selects Its tasks. In a very few cases, only organizations such as
CMA representing identifiable blocks of Interest will have access. Here
obviously. If it Is worth doing, CMA should do It. The option is absten­
tion. There are only seven official CMA representatives (plus two alter­
nates) in such categories.
I mentioned before that the major standards effort comes from
direct member company participation rather than CMA participation. EAC
does attempt to track participation In areas of significant interest and
maintain an informal liaison with member company reps. This contributes
to a broader coverage and less redundant effort.
Where the tracking Indicates a lack of coverage In an area of
interest, we try to encourage some member company to fill the gap. It
was this gap Identification effort that some years ago spotted the fact
that there was no user Industry participation on the NEC panels. In this
case, the task was so complex that a more formal response was judged to
be needed and a coordinated effort was mounted which has been highly
effective. The bulk of the effort Is still provided directly by member
company volunteers, but without the coordination available only through
CMA, the total Industry cost to participate would have been much higher
and is unlikely to have been as effective. (19 companies, 1 member each
on T.G. 29 reps to NEC) The strength of a well thought out, unified
industry position has been amply demonstrated.
CMA 038405
Just because £ standard is used by the chemical industry does
not make it an issue. The EAC does not worry about, nor deal with, the
dimensions of bolt threads. We don't care much about flanges so long as
the flange we will buy next month will mate with the one we bought last
month.
But if there is an effort at significant change, as with the
metrication thrust of a few years ago, even flange dimensions can become
a key issue. These "crises" come and go.
The EAC relies primarily on its informal liaison with member
company representatives as well as its own membership to surface the
problem areas which are appropriate for CMA attention. Appropriateness
is measured by potential impact on the industry and whether CMA is needed
(as opposed to member company rep handling the matter with some
support). The net result is the very selective direct involvement by the
EAC mentioned before, but a much wider behind-the-scenes impact with both
indirect and direct savings out of proportion to the modest budget.
I don't want to leave you with the Impression that looking at a
few standards represents the sum total of EAC activities. Response to
pertinent regulation and legislation is a clear mandate. For example,
this year we had expected two OSHA proposals on electric safety topics.
We were not disappointed when they didn't Issue ........ but they will be
One of our concerns growing out of several years of arm
wrestling with the National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel
Inspectors and the relatively satisfactory outcome at the national level
is that the arena will shift to the state level. The National Board is,
after all, composed entirely of senior state level appointees, and the
state capitals are their natural habitat. The EAC has been working with
State Affairs 01 vision to attempt to work out. an effective early warning
system that will be both comprehensive and cost effective. A necessary
adjunct will be the necessary backup and support to the local CIC, if and
as required.
The EAC has for a number of years, sponsored a Computer User
Forum, at two year Intervals. These educational sessions In a rapidly
moving technology have been extremely well received and are generally
self-supporting.
This year. In partial response to the Bhopal incident, the EAC
undertook to conduct a similar forum on Inspection and maintenance and
instructed a newly formed task group to focus on safety through inspec­
tion and maintenance procedures and techniques.
This group will be
holding its third meeting next week, and seems well on the way to
creating an informative and constructive session.
CMA 038406
6
For the coining year, we plan:
to continue the programs already in place, especially those
related to the NEC and the two forums planned.
We need to continue to strive for a comprehensive and cost
effective mechanism for dealing with state level regulation
of pressure equipment.
In preparation for the storm of regulatory legislation that
in the wake of Bhopal and later incidents now seems in­
evitable, we need to position the EAC to support the
Association most effectively. Some parts of this can and
will be undertaken at EAC initiative—for example, an in­
creased Interaction with and support to the Safety and Health
Committee seems appropriate. But the EAC, by the nature of
the subjects It deals with and the normal working assignments
of Its members, is essentially a reactive, not a proactive
group. Therefore, the majority of issues needing attention
will necessarily flow from the Association to the EAC for
supporting contribution and/or prime responsibility.
Thank you for your time and attention.
In this expurgated
version of EAC activities I hope I've left you with some key thoughts. '
e
The whole participation In standards activities Is closely
akin to more obvious advocacy Initiatives
e
By careful selection of topics and leveraging,
returns a hefty payout on funds expended.
The EAC plays a coordlnative role not replaceable by another
organization or the member companies acting individually
the
EAC
And finally,
a
That the EAC can and will be responsive to the Association's
needs In the coming times.
Thank you.
CMA
CMA 038407
sound and cost-effective.
o superfund and its implementation continues to be a high
priority for the SMC and the chemical industry. Significant
progress is being made in CPA's implementation of this progm.
A continuing resource commitment is necessary to assure
continued reasonable and cost-effective implementation of
Superfund. The BMC has addressed several key elements of
EVA's Superfund implementing progm (i.a., revised national
contingency plan, national priority lists updates), and CPA
guidance documents and KPA and OTA studies. We believe our
efforts were helpful in assuring that the nati nal contingency
CMA 038301
plan's clean up standard remains flexible. In light of
anticipated reauthorizetion and wendment of Suparfund this
y««r, tha laval of QtA Suparfund regulatory activity will
r«ain high for tha naxt tavaral yaars.
M1MBER CCMPANY PERSONNEL
Tha tachnical and lagal expertise of some 294 paopla from 62 coaipanias
is currantly being tappad to achiava tha goals of tha 2MC. Compered
to ona yaar ago, tha numbar of member companies' raaourcas voluntaarad
has incraasad by 6.5 pareant. In addition, tha number of assigiwaats
undertaken by member company parsonnal has incraasad alavan pareant.
Thasa figuras raflact a ganaral ascalation of lagislativa and
ragulsto'Y action undar all tha anvironaantal statutas. In addition,
thasa incraasas damonstrata a continuing confidanca of mambar
cempanies that CMA cost-effectively advocatas important issues and
positions of concern to the chemical industry. In tha naxt yaar, wa
anticipate incraasad activity on tha toxics air omissions issue and a
continuing high level of activity on all solid vasts issues,
especially groundwater, RCRA implementing regulations, and suparfund
■attars. Thasa incraasad activities will require a modest but
incraasad resource comitmant to achieve CMA's goals.
QIC LEADER TRAINING
The most valuable resource tha BMC and CMA have is the member company
volunteers that participate on our connittee, its 18 task groups, and
40 work groups. Tha me, its 18 task groups, and work groups have
held approximately 240 formal CMA meetings in tha past yaar. In
order to most affectively use these resources, tha BMC developed and
implemented a leader effectiveness training progrm. The program
provides the leaders basics on antitrust, CMA organisation, qia and
me rules and procedures, and principles of meeting leadership
effectiveness. Tha training "instructors* primarily came from QtA
staff and QIC members. Tha meeeting effectiveness segment of the
course was developed for use by tha training department of BASF
Wyandotte Corporation. To data, 61 parsons have participated in tha
course.
BMC EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
One of the responsibilities of tha Environmental Management Comsdttee
is to help mambar companies understand their environmental responsi­
bilities. The BMC has mat this challenge by holding semi-annual
anvironuntal updates on all significant CoBittee activities, and
conducting other sasd.nars on major issues on an as needed basis. In
*^ha past year, the BMC has sponsored 2 updates and 6 seminars on a
wide spectrum of environmental issues (i.e., groundwater treatment,
ACRA amentaents/RCRA compliance, water quality basad permits). The
CMA 038302
seminars are routinely open to all 0<A and Chemical Industry Council
members, and on a case-by-case baaia opan to othar organizations
(i.a., SOGMA, American Patrolata Inatituta, Utilitiaa Water Act
Group).
CMA STAFF PERSONNEL
Eight profassionals and five support staff ara assignad to tha
Environmental Oivision. An additional professional to menage the
specially funded underground Injection Control project will be
retained under contract, the Division may need to expand its support
resources to address the rapidly expanding workload of the
Environmental Division (i.e., solid waste progr«s, air toxics) and
still handle the demand for CMA services and to fulfill the goals of
tha CcsBittae.
(A detailed sumary of Corned, ttae1 a 1985-86 objectives
Other OtA staff working on SMC activities include the equivalent
of three and one half attorneys from the Xiegal Department, three
professionals from the GovernaMnt Relations Department, and assistance
from the State Affairs Division and Communications Department, as
needed. During the next year, we expect a need to maintain this level
of support from all other departments within CMA.
RESEARCH AND CONSULTING
The total IY 84/85 budget for me research and consulting projects was
set by the Board of Directors at 9218,000. As the fiscal year pro­
gressed, other comittee funds beeme available and the actual EMC
expenditures totalled 9229,500 as detailed on pages 18 through
21. The research and consulting budget approved for EMC activities
for FT 85/86 is 9360,000. This figure does not include unanticipated
funding needs for issues that arose or have significantly escalated
after the funding process began. In light of the increasing level of
environmental activities, noted above, the current budget may not be
adequate. It is likely that some necessary projects can not be
addressed within the existing budget. In such instances, the EMC will
request, on an as needed basis, supplemental funding.
PROGRAM OUTLOOK
As the Ft 85/86 year begins, CMA and EMC are facing continuing
challenges and sme new environaental issues.
groundwater, RCRA land disposal ban regulations, drinking water
regulations.) To meet this challenge, the SMC has programatlcly
modified its methods of operations to enhance the role of the EMC
sponsors with each task group, and EMC's planning activities.
EMC clearly defines task group six month objectives, more active
participation of EMC sponsors with task groups, routine policy
CMA 038303
j.„lopm—•* reports by sponsors «t QIC mattings.) In addition, ths
OC has implemented horisontsl issue management (i.e., «d hoe group
r#pr>s«nting several task groups and/or standing committees) in
jddltlon to ths traditional functional (l.e., task group) issue
sanagasant.
It i* imperative that as an Association vs develop forvarding
thinking policies that allow ths industry to get ia front on an issue
so that vs end up managing the issue rather than the issue managing
our limited resources. We have made progress in how we are viewed by
t&e public. Congress, and DA, in that vs are considered a
constructive factor on key eaviromental Issues (e.g.. Superfund,
ACM, surface water). If the chemical industry is going to continue
to be successful in its advocacy before SPA and Congress, it is
•asential, more than ever, that vs not only develop proactive
positions but provide SPA and Congress the necessary alternatives
•nd/or supporting data. In this regard, all levels of DA and
Congressional staffs continue to request industry data and/or
information as part of the Congressional and regulatory development
process.
A meaningful response by industry will require significant member
company and staff resources. If we want to effectively edvocate
positions before DA, we must continue to make this resource
camitaent. Such efforts will result in limited regulations and/or
Mrs cost-effective regulations for the chemical industry that also ,
will provide a substantially improved environment.
'The nc will be challenged during the next year to develop proectlve
positions, to rsspond to the DA, and to adequately support
legislative and judicial issues as they arise. In this regard, the
me will need company coMitments of adequate resources to address new
regulatory and legislative initiatives concerning groundwater, air
toxics, ACM wendsents implementation. In addition, we will need to
support OiA activities concerning possible wendments to the Clean Air
Act, and development of a new piece of groundwater legislation. There
will also be extensive regulatory activities to address on
implementation of ell environmental statutes. This activity also
includes possible litigation related to implementation of the Clean
Water Act, Clean Air Act, ACM, Safe Drinking Water Act end Superfuad.
Many environmental issues addressed at the federal level will become
■ore important at the state level and poaslbly at the international
level. The 1MC will therefore be ia e continuous process of sotting
priorities and concentrating our resources where they will have the
fastest likelihood of positive impact for the chemical industry.
CMA
CMA 038304
EXHIBIT 8
Report to CMA Board of Directors
G.F. Fort, Monsanto Company
Chairman, CMA. State Affairs Committee
September 8, 198S
Good morning — I am Garth Fort from Monsanto. My purpose today
to report on the State Affairs Committee, which has the
responsibility of serving as the "watchdog for the chemical industry
j.nt rest at the state level."
This committee was formed four years age, so we're in the same
position as a politician completing his first term in office and
running for re-election on the record.
In the case of this committee, that record is a good one ....so
far.
The stakes have been high at the state level.
Congress passes major environmental legislation — the Clean.
Water Act, Clean Air Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Safe
Drinking Water Act, and "Superfund." But all of these are "minimum
requirements," and the states are permitted — and even encouraged —
to go farther.
Daniel Bean, writing for the "Policy Studies Journal,"
underscored the rising importance of state governments. He said,
"They are no longer regarded as horse and buggy governments, as they
were in the 1960's and are coming once again to be viewed as
laboratories of innovation and democracy.
The Conservation Foundation has pointed out that
environmentalists of a decade ago generally sought federal solutions
to pollution problems. They now look frequently to the states,
recognizing that Washington has no monopoly on "environmental virtue."
Examples are numerous. California regulations on hazardous
wastes were copied in last year's RCRA reauthorization. California
laws passed by Sher and Katz in 1983 and 1984 were models for the
present federal regulations of pits, ponds and lagoons. Very
recently, the League of Women Voters initiated a program on "Household
Hazardous wastes" focused at the local level. The effort quickly
spawned twenty bills this year at the state level, and promises to
attract the attention of U.S. EPA, if not Congress. Even today, New
Jersey state legislators are directly affecting the congressional
debate on "Community Right-to-Know and Catastrophe Prevention."
CMA 038305
Four years ago, as CMA responded to the increasing importance of
state issues, they recognized the challenges.:
- The political playing field is geographically spread over 50
states.
- There are thousands of key players — seventy-five hundred
legislators alone, with staffers and executive agency personnel
numbering thousands more.
- There are 250,000 bills introduced each year which could affect
our business.
- Timing for political action at the state level is measured in
days, not months or years, as is frequently the case in
Congress.
To meet these challenges CMA developed a unique program that is
built on sound managerial and political principles:
Set priorities on issues to make the most of limited
resources.
Get involved as early as possible in the political process to
maximize effectiveness.
Develop position statements and supporting arguments before
the issue surfaces, to keep up with the fast track political
Emphasize local involvement for early alert and political
effectiveness. Those on the scene have the best chance of
knowing what's developing and politicians listen best to
those who elect them.
To implement this program, a network of state chemical industry
councils and trade associations was chosen to be the cornerstone of
CMA's field marketing force to sell our positions on priority issues.
But it was clear that the network needed lots of support and
direction.
As Jim Murray reported last year, activities were planned to
cultivate that network by making CMA a focal point of information
m
CMA 038306
gathered from the collective national resources of our industry. Many
0f these activities are well underway, and have truly turned CMA
into a "Center of Excellence" for state issues. Member company
personnel and state trade associations are routinely turning to CMA
for advice and guidance. Other industry trade associations like
American Petroleum Institute and the National Agricultural Chemical
Association are contacting CMA on mutually important state issues.
Associations of elected officials like National Governor's
Association, National Conference of State Legislators, Council of
State Governments and even the National Association of Towns and
Townships are turning to CMA for input on policy positions, agenda
ideas and speakers. These indications of success are gratifying, but
most importantly, the "CMA approach" has clearly helped produce
"bottom line results" for member companies.
Our system was severely tested this year and it worked.
lock at some specific results:
Let's
By June of last year, community right-to-know was targeted for
priority coverage for the then upcoming 1985 legislative session.
Drawing on two years of experience with this issue at both the state
and federal levels, CMA staff efficiently pulled together a wealth of
information— position papers with back-up arguments, copies of all
previous state laws and regulations, and copies of testimony that had
been given before Congress and at the state level. In addition, CMA
State Affairs Group held regional information seminars on the subject
to educate members of the CIC's network.
when Bhopal hit in December, the CMA State Affairs organization
as a whole was well prepared for the unprecedented flood of state
hills that were promptly dumped into the legislative hopper, when the
dust settled this year over 150 bills on this subject had been
introduced in 40 states, and over 22 states passed some right-to-know
provisions. State legislators had developed new proposals to force
governmental control on our plants, and tried to move the issue far
beyond the CMA position.
Although battles are still being fought in California, New Jersey
and Michigan, to date all the laws passed this year are generally
consistent with CMA policy. We have retained our trade secret
protection rights and successfully avoided costly requirements for
unique labeling, environmental emission monitoring and independent
risk management audit3.
Public compensation was another priority issue where the results
were good. It was an active issue in five states — California,
Massachusetts, New Jersey, Minnesota and Rhode Island. CMA's position
was that NO administrative public compensation program was needed and
CMA 038307
tort law should not be changed. The CMA Policy Committee's marching
orders to the state troops in the field were clear — "Hold Pork Chop
CMA staff and member company representatives helped guide the
strategy in these states. The UAREP study results were effectively
used in conjunction with expert testimony provided by personnel from
Centers for Disease Control, academia, the insurance industry, the
legal profession, and our own companies. We were successful in four
of the five states and marginally successful in the fifth.
Only Minnesota passed a public compensation bill which
established an administrative fund — and it was very limited in
scope. The situation there was unique in that local industry
supported the legislation because it solved some severe insurability
problems created by an earlier 1983 Minnesota superfund law.
The results on another priority issue — state superfund laws —
also were good, we successfully prevented both the adoption of
unacceptable liability language and the inclusion of provisions for
personal injury compensation. State superfund fees were held within
reasonable limits, although some increased significantly.
CMA also played a role in preventing further proliferation of
unique state regulations of toxic air contaminants. As an example,
Massachusetts has been slowed down in their effort to regulate 450
compounds in six months by shortcutting good science. Reason has
prevailed despite Massachusetts' impatience with the federal
government for only promulgating regulations for six (6) hazardous
pollutants since 1970.
Progress was even made in the transportation are — CMA helped
orchestrate the passage of a couple of more "Good Samaritan" laws
bringing the total to 34 states.
CMA member companies took the lead in these cases. Our
preparation over the previous three years paid off, and our network
delivered. But we can't rest on past success. The outlook for the
future is one of increasing challenges.
Additional releases of toxic substances since Bhopal continue to
erode our privilege of self-regulation.
Instead of being innocent until proven guilty, industry now can
look forward to trying to justify its existence and its very right to
operate in the neighborhood.
CMA 038308
Cur challenge will be to prove that our operations will NOT
create a problem. The burden of proving this kind of negative is
limited only by reasonableness, as defined by state authorities whose
survival in office depends on their response to political winds.
At the same time the political climate is
policy is turning the "spotlight" on state and
issues — groundwater regulation and toxic air
will be handled primarily by the states if the
deteriorating, federal
local programs. Two
contaminants control —
when EPA announced its groundwater strategy, it was — quote —
"based on tradition deeply ingrained in our legal and institutional
history. The states have and should continue to have fundamental
responsibility for protection and management of the resource itself.."
States will be deciding when and how much industry pays for
multi-million dollar programs related to:
- Cleaning up groundwater under existing plant sites.
- Providing alternative sources of drinking water for the public.
- Requiring retrofit capital for existing facilities to ensure
better groundwater protection.
States will maintain the right to ban the use or sale of certain
ehemical products if groundwater is threatened.
The story is similar for air toxic control. On June 4, Lee
Thomas announced a substantially new approach for reducing public
health risks from airborne toxic pollutants. Federal standards for
individual contaminants will no longer be the prime tactic for control
of air toxics.
EPA plans to provide financial assistance for strengthening state
programs for control of air toxics from large point sources having
localized impacts. We will have to address the issue not in
Washington, but at the numerous locations where problems are felt to
exist. No longer will states have to wait for U.S. EPA to act before
they can require new emission controls on "toxics," Tens, if not
hundreds, of millions of dollars for additional emission controls are
at stake.
Clearly, groundwater
of our top priorities for
in January, our opponents
of the same issues we had
and toxic air contaminant issues will be two
next year. In addition, when the bell rings
will be back for the next round on several
last year.
CMA 038309
SUFEPFUMD
Some have estimated that by 1990 total state superfund program
costs will exceed those of CERCLA as states tackle more abandoned
sites not on the National Priority List and pay more for long-term
sits maintenance.
RIGHT-TO-KNOW
Our opponents will push for what they did not get this year —
emission monitoring and independent audits of our plant safety
programs.
PUBLIC COMPENSATION
Minnesota's action this year will cause some states to play
catch-up. In addition, plaintiff lawyers will continue to push to
reduce "burden of proof” for chronic health cases. Their carrot is
hundreds of millions of dollars of court settlements.
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL PRACTICES
The push to phase out landfills and deep wells will continue.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE TRANSPORTATION ISSUE
Post-Bhopal analysis of risks will focus on transportation of
hazardous materials. Routing restrictions and additional fees will be
considered.
Cur planning conference in June identified these as priority
issues and we have established some specific objectives to improve our
effectiveness in tackling them:
- Expand our computerized early alert and information network to
improve staff productivity.
- Setter use of public relations or advocacy communication at
state level.
- Establish two-way "electronic mail" capabilities with key
chemical industry councils to better meet their needs.
Our action plans for next year remain consistent with the
original premise of the CMA State Affairs Program. Basically, we
target to do what we do better.
CMA 038310
Last year, Jim Murray stood before you to ask for additional CMA
staff support for the state program. You responded, and I think the
results speak for themselves*. The team has performed. On behalf of
everyone who was out there in the trenches, I want to borrow a slogan
used by the United Way a cogple of years age, and say — "Thanks to
We have built a national network that is stronger than any one of
us could have done on our own. By leveraging our position, we have
produced very good returns on our rather limited investment.
The CMA State Affairs effort needs your continued support next
year in four basic areas:
Maintain CMA staff support at the same level as last year.
Provide additional active member company personnel to serve
on state CMA task groups established for the priority issues.
Support state trade associations and chemical industry
councils with dues and experienced people. Bill wood
will expand on this request in his presentation, which
follows.
Involve senior chemical industry executives in state matters
with follow up provided by local personnel.
With your continued support in these areas, CMA State Affairs
Committee should do an even better job next year as the "watchdog for
our industry at the state level."
CMA
CMA 038311
f
exhibit c
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
STATE CHEMICAL ORGANIZATIONS STATUS REPORT
BACKGROUND
During the past several years, there has been increasing interest in the
status, programs and collective capabilities of the various organizations
representing the chemical industry at the state level. These organizations
include state chemical associations, state chemical Industry councils (CICs)
and chemical industry committees of state manufacturers associations. In
addition, there has also been interest expressed concerning how the evolving
state and local Involvement of CMA fits with the existing programs, prior­
ities and capabilities of the state organizations.
FORMATION OE WORK GROUP
To meet this need, an ad hoc work group was assembled, composed of
member company state and public affairs professionals who both individually
and through the corporations they represent had played a key role in the
development and evolution of state organizations around the country.
OBJECTIVES
The work group identified the following objectives for this report:
Prepare a comprehensive status report on the current
objectives, structure, finances, programs, plans and needs of
the various state organizations,
Assess the collective current resources and capabilities of
the 18 state organizations.
. Draw some conclusions about the overall operation of the state
groups, identifying particularly those elements which make
successful CIC programs successful and those elements which
inhibit success.
Develop and communicate recommendations for both CMA and
member company actions relative to improving and supporting
the state organizations and their existing missions.
The following were clearly not the objectives of the report:
Evaluate or judge the performance of any individual state
organization.
Assess or develop an overall CMA program for expanded
Involvement at the state and local level. This could follow,
however, based on this group's report and utilizing a
broader-based range of Interest and expertise.
CMA 038312
2
PERSONAL SURVEY OF STATE ORGANIZATIONS
In order to carry out its objectives, the group developed a survey which
sought information and opinion from and about each organization in the
following areas: organization (including structure, funding, staffing and
member participation), issue coverage, advocacy programs (legislative,
regulatory, public/media communications, education, grassroots, etc), commu­
nications and image-building activities, and future plans and needs, the
group personally interviewed a range of individuals in each state to seek
their input, and this material was then compiled and analyzed by the work
group. Summaries of the state surveys are contained in the full report and
are presented in chart form following this Executive Summary.
CONCLUSION FROM SURVEY
Organizational Classification. The 18 state organizations may
be classified into four organizational categories:
Needs for CICs. In states of primary importance, the chemical
industry needs to have a network of strong CICs (either independent
or affiliated with other state business associations) with multiple
capabilities to achieve not only the primary goal in each state
which is minimizing inappropriate legislation, but also the
national goals of the chemical industry as well which include:
Independent, with an all volunteer effort.
(Alabama and
Delaware)
Independent, largely volunteer, but with a part-time staff,
consultant and/or lobbyist.
(Pennsylvania, Florida, Michigan-,
Illinois, Missouri)
Affiliated with state trade association, utilizing principally
trade association staff, but may have own part-time staff,
consultant, or lobbyist.
(New York, Connecticut, Ohio,
Tennessee, Kentucky, West Virginia, Massachusetts)
Independent with one or more full-time staff members, together
with a multi-committee structure responsible for individual
programs.
(Texas, Louisiana, New Jersey, California).
Uniformity in state legislation/regulation
Avoidance of bad precedents for Federal legislation
Support for Federal Grassroots Program
Support for Regional Communications efforts on national issues
Support for CAER/NCRIC programs and any other industry
initiatives which require local implementation or support
Programs and Capabilities. Collectively, the 18 state groups
represent a broad spectrum of programs and capabilities. While a
few can be deemed fully functional organizations with multifaceted
programs, many are still seeking their identity or are otherwise in
a state of transition or growth. It is also important to point out
that many still see their role restricted almost entirely to direct
legislative and regulatory advocacy. Much progress has been made
in the last five years, and more will follow with the proper
leadership, member company commitment and the allocation of
sufficient resources.
CMA 038313
3
Budget and Finances. The budgets and dues structures of the
various state organizations varies enormously from state-to-state,
with the budget range being from $0 to over $500,000. This variance
can be somewhat misleading since 7 groups operate affiliated with
state manufacturers associations to whom they pay dues separately.
However, it is accurate to say that with the exception of four
states (Texas, Louisiana, New Jersey and California), the rest of
the state organizations generally operate on budgets of well under
$100,000 per year. The bulk of the resources are not provided by
direct dues, but are contributed in the form of member company
personnel and expertise. Dues are generally based on a flat fee,
plus surcharges for additional facilities and number of employees.
Elements which Contribute to Successful CIC Programs.
following were identified:
The
Strong commitment by senior management of major companies with
the largest in-state presence and resources.
Broad participation by chemical Industry companies represented
in that state with human as well as financial resources com­
mitted to the program.
Strong qualitative and quantitative CIC staff support - full
or part-time lobbyist, executive director or-manufacturers
association staff located in the State Capitol.
Member company support of an equitable fee structure which
generates sufficient revenue to operate a meaningful program.
Strong programs do not seem to be seriously affected by
economic downturns.
Focus on strong legislative or leglslatlve/regulatory programs
with the goal being to make a meaningful Impact on the public
policy process.
Recognition of the CIC as the prime resource on "our issues”.
Strong working relationship with CMA and other key allied
industries and the ability to deal effectively with the
opposition.
Member company satisfaction and the degree to which they feel
they are being adequately represented in the legislative
process.
Where appropriate, strong affiliation with the state manufac­
turers association.
Access to political action committee resources
Strong grassroots program (ACIT).
Elements which Prevent CIC Programs from being Fully
Effective. The following elements were identified as factors which
may prevent individual programs from being fully effective:
Lack of sufficient chemical industry representation in the
state.
Lack of commitment by key in-state companies.
Lack of technical expertise/specialized resources being made
available,
Geographic spread of members in the state - difficulty in
getting to capital easily/frequently.
CMA 038314
4
Lack of adequate funding or an otherwise flawed dues system
which lacks member support.
Lack of strong retained leadership/staff services.
Lack of agreement on common/priorlty goals and effective ways
to meet those goals.
Negative media/image of the industry in the state.
Inability to network or work with other business organizations
and CMA.
Credibility and militancy of the "other side" in the state.
COMPARISON WITH OTHER MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES' STATE PROGRAMS.
The CMA/CIC Network approach was compared and contrasted to the
programs operated by the tobacco industry and the petroleum Industry.
The CMA/CIC program was determined to be Increasingly effective at a
cost of about one-eighth of the API or Tobacco Institute approach of a
large centralized program.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following recommendations for CMA and its member companies were
developed based upon the survey, interviews and work group discussions.
These recommendations are designed to enhance the state chemical
organizations' ability to carry out their present missions, the primary
(and in some cases exclusive) one being state legislative and regulatory
advocacy. To the extent the industry's priorities for these
organizations change or significantly evolve, a further examination and
some additional actions and recommendations will be required.
CMA Actions
Under current circumstances, the nature of the organizational
relationship between CMA and the individual state chemical
organizations should remain as it is, rather than move toward
the API approach of integrated state petroleum councils funded
and staffed directly by the national organization.
CMA priorities should be on strengthening existing CICs rather
than creating new ones at this time. CMA should carefully
consider how the Industry should be collectively represented
in those states without CICs and where there is a distinct
chemical Industry issue which will not be adequately addressed
otherwise. Specifically, should resources be made available
to have a CMA state lobbyist on a retained basis where
circumstances warrant?
CMA should allocate funds to help finance specific projects or
operations of state chemical councils on a seed money/matching
grant program to assist in getting new or expanded operations
going. Such grants for projects or expanded operations should be
for a limited time and made under specific criteria and standards.
CMA 038315
5
The focus of such CMA funding should be on supporting those
programs and priorities of the chemical industry which are of
interstate and national significance. Funding for ongoing
programs and for issues and projects primarily of intrastate
Interest should continue to be funded directly by the member
companies of each state organization. Similar funds currently
provided through the CMA communication program to help initiate
issue-oriented communication projects at the state level also
have value and should be continued.
CMA should continue and renew its efforts to build a stronger
overall relationship between CMA and the individual CICs so
that CMA and the CICs can better utilize each other's capabil­
ities. Specifically, CMA should;
Increase its efforts to provide technical/scientific/
legal support to the CICs on the state aspects of key
chemical Industry Issues.
Continue to devote adequate resources to its ongoing
Internal state affairs and communications programs which
provide direct support to state CIC efforts.
Provide continuing support to increase membership and
active participation in the CICs and should continue to
seek ways to Increase the visibility of the efforts of
the CICs with senior management.
Continue efforts in working with other national business
associations on state level cooperation and coordination.
Examine options for developing more equitable and uniform
methods for funding CIC operations.
Fund and conduct leadership and training workshops for
CIC staff and key member company volunteers in leadership
positions in the CICs.
Member Company Actions
Top down corporate involvement by senior chemical industry
executives in state government affairs generally and in CIC
activities specifically. They need to make effective CICs a
priority in their organizations by:
Joining where they manufacture or otherwise
have an Interest
Providing adequate financial resources
Providing the right kind of people to support
the effort
Making corporate technical resources available
Top down personal support and Involvement by senior chemical
Industry executives in state matters, particularly legislative
CMA 038316
6
advocacy. Individuals In aach corporation naad to selectively
lnvolva senior executives In these Issues. This will Increase
corporate awareness of the serious nature of the state Issues
and will also Increase changes for legislative success.
Member companies should assign an Individual overall respon­
sibility for State Affairs for the corporation.
Member companies should bring CIO staff/leaders to corporate
headquarters for briefings on key state Issues.
Action Required
Member companies should consider Individual actions based upon the
member company recommendations in the report. CMA should evaluate
the individual CMA recommendations In the context of Its 1985/86
budget and program review process.
CMA
CMA 038317
1
STATS 8URVRY KSSULTS
SUMMARY CHART
STATE ORGANIZATIONS
AIiImm Chemical Association
Chtaictl Industry Council
of California
State
Ranking
in
Value of
Shipnenta
Independent
or
Affiliated
Organitations
Number of
Menbera
Budget
Publie
Relations/
Communications
Program
Staff
Cover ravent
Relations
Program
None
Ves (not very
active)
No
Ho
education
PrcMjrs*
20
Independent
Independent
67
200,000
1 (2 Professionals,
1 secretary)
Ves
Yes
Yes
Ho
Ho
5.000
Chemical Affairs Croup
Connecticut BA IA
22
Affiliated with
Industry Assoc.
25
None
None (utilise CBIA staff)
Yes
CIC of Delaware
27
Independent
17
None
None
Ho (holds leg
di nnere)
Florida CIC
IS
Independent
20
25,000
Ratained law fire
Yea
No
Ho
4
Independent
SO
‘70.000
Part-time Base. Dir.
Part-time Lobbyist
Ves
Yes
Ves
Affiliated with
AIK
S4
None
Mona (utilise AIK staff)
Ves
Ho
Ho
Independent
60
400.000
6 14 professionals.
2 secretaries)
Ves
Yes
Yes
None
None (utilise AIM staff)
Ves
No
Ho
Ves
Ves
CIC of Illinois
Chenical Committee of Associ­
ated Industries of Kentucky
Louisiana Chenical Association
19
Ho (holds
press luncheons)
Ho
Chenical Affairs Croup of
Associated Indus, of Maas.
24
Affiliated with
AIM
19
Michigan Chenical Council
11
Independent
17
90,000
Association Hgmt Firm 6
retained law firm
Yes
CIC of Missouri
19
Independent
21
25,000
Part-time Base. Dir.
retained law firm
Ves
CIC of New Jersey
2
Independent
94
199.000
1 (2 professionals,
1 secretary)
Yes
Alliance of Chenical Indus­
tries of Hew York State
T
Affiliated with
NVBC
40
40.000
Retained lobbyist) also
utilise NVBC staff
Yes
Ohio Chenical Council
S
Affiliated with
OMA
52
50,000
Part-time Baec. Dir.
Ves
Yes
Yes
Pennsylvania CIC
9
Independent
19
50,000
Retained lobbyist
Ves
Ho
NO
Chenical Industry Connlttee
of Tennessee Hfge. Asroc.
CMA 038318
Teres Chenical Council
Chenical Industry Connlttee
of Heat Virginia Hfgs. Assoc
9
1
16
Affiliated with
TMA
10
Independent
Affiliated with
MVMA
Hone
None (utilize TMA staff)
96
551,000
19
None
Chenical Progre ss
Week
Ves
Just beginning
Ves
Ho
7 Stafff 2 Consultants
Ves
Ves
Mona (utilize KVMA staff)
Ves
Ves
Ves
HO
Ho
Yes
Ho
Attachment
EXHIBIT C
r
EXHIBIT D
REPORT OF THE GOVERNMENT RELATIONS COMMITTEE
TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
September 9, 1985
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
-Pjjinizational
Early sections of the report of th« Government Relations Committee are
^voted to its role, membership and organization. The cosnittee is the focal
aoiflt f the coordinated Federal legislative activities of the chemical
industry. Through the cooperative efforts of a highly professional community
oi Washington representatives, the Coonittee provides a service which offers to
2IA and its various program elements;
monitoring of key issues;
advice during policy making;
legislative strategy development
and political analysis;
direct legislative communications
programs.
Where the importance of issues has dictated the formation of a task group
or appointment of a Committee Reyman, the staff executive/support function is
provided by a member of the professional staff of the CMA Government Relations
Department.
gpacial Activities
A section describes events such as the CMA Briefing Breakfast and the
CHEMICAL FORUM Luncheon series aimed at promoting intaraction between industry
Washington representatives, encouraging participation and keeping them abreast
of developments on current issues. Several kinds of information and
coordinating services are also detailed.
Grassroots
A section describes the continuing priority effort toward a coordinated
industry grassroots system to build local influence in Congressional
decision-making.
f
Issues and Actions
A section provides a series of reports by task group chairmen and kaymen
on important issues which occupy the attention of the Government Relations
Committee. These issues rtprssent the work product on which this committee
provides overall legislative service and leadership for CMA advocacy. Also
included are a listing of recent CMA Congressional testimony.
^"d-tttee 1984-85 Objectives end Progress
A section reports on three areas on which the Committee has placed
•sphasis;
a focus on the management of priority issues;
linking legislative and communications efforts;
and,
CMA 038319
EXHIBIT E
ADMINISTRATION'S 1985 TAX REFORM PROPOSAL
REPORT ON CMA POSITIONS AND ACTIONS
BACKQtOUND?
On May 28, President Reagan announced his 198S tax reform
program.
In general, the President's program would shift almost $40
billion of the Federal income tax burden now borne by individuals to
business taxpayers. Within the business sector, the President's
program would substantially increase the tax burden of businesses that
are capital intensive and that engage in significant international
trade. Although the impact of specific provisions may vary from
company to company, the overall impact of the President's tax program
would cost the chemical industry more than $2.5 billion annually.
The President's program provides for a reduction in the maximtan
corporate tax rate from 46 to 33 percent. In addition, it provides
for a deduction in computing corporate income taxes of 10 percent of
dividends paid. Offsetting these reductions, the President's plan
would repeal the investment tax credit, replace the ACRS depreciation
system with a less favorable capital cost recovery system, and replace
the present minimum tax with a new minimum tax on corporate income.
Beginning in 1986, significant new recapture rules would apply to
taxpayers who took depreciation deductions of $400,000 or more in the
period January 1, 1980 through July 1, 1986. Under these new rules,
40 percent of the excess depreciation claimed for tax purposes over
that allowed for earnings and profits (less a $300,000 overall
.deduction) would be recaptured at post-1985 corporate tax rates.
Thus, capital intensive taxpayers who used the incentives for capital
formation in President Reagan's 1981 tax program would be subject to
significant tax increases over the next three calendar years.
The President's tax program also proposes significant changes in
the taxation of international activities of U.S. corporations. The
program would impose a more restrictive per country limitation on the
use of the foreign tax credit and would eliminate the old and
established "title passage" test for detesnining the source of income
from the sale of property, including the export of manufactured
products. The proposal includes stringent new rules on the allocation
of interest expenses among within the members of a consolidated group.
Significant reductions in tax benefits are also provided for
activities in U.S. possessions, notably Puerto Rico.
In general, Democratic and Republican Congressional leaders have
supported the broad objective to pass tax reform legislation this
year. The Administration and Congressional leaders have also agreed,
for the moment, that the objectives of tax refonn should be
accomplished in legislation that neither increases nor decreases the
flow of tax revenues to the Federal Government.
CMA PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND RESPONSE
In November, 1984, the Tax Policy Cpmmittee identified several
major tax issues that are of continuing concern to the chemical
industry. Subsequently, the Treasury Department proposed major tax
reforms that would affect many of these subjects.
At the Board's January meeting. Committee Chairman William M.
Bellamy, Jr. reported that the Tax Policy Committee was developing a
series of specific issue responses to the Treasury's tax reform
proposals that could be incorporated into a CMA legislative statement.
In May, Mr. Bellamy delivered a progress report to the Executive
Cowaittee and noted that the Tax Policy Coanittee would request that
CMA commission independent studies for use in CMA's tax legislative
program.
CMA commissioned Price-Waterhouse to conduct a study of effective
tax rates in the ehmsical industry. Also, CMA provided a grant to the
Institute for Research in the Economics of Taxation (IRET) to study
the impact of selected tax refon proposals on the formation of
capital in the chemical industry. In July, the Tax policy Coanittee
developed a CMA legislative statement on the Administration's tax
program vftiich was presented to the House Committee on Ways and Means
by Dexter F. Baker, President, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. At
its August 13 and 14, 198S meetings, the Tax Policy Committee and QIC
Tax Legislative Task Group established priorities with respect to
major tax issues of chemical industry concern and approved in concept
its plan for legislative action.
Attached is a brief summary of CMA's position on tax reform
legislation.
ACTIONt
For information only.
CMA 038322
r
EXHIBIT F
superfund status report
Legislative Review
By Walls Denyes, Eastman Kodak Company
House Energy and Commerce Committee/ on July 26, reported the Superfund
H.R. 2317. The bill was approved by a vote of 31 to 10, with one member
Noting- This vote occurred after six long days that included many emotional
"Abates on the issues. The substance of the original bi-partisan compromise bill
3
retained. The bill as reported has been judged by CMA's technical groups to
wa reasonable, although it substantially increased the programs and authority over
preset law.
Following is a brief list of key issues that were considered and the votes
which major and damaging changes were rejected:
Mandatory clean up schedules.
Far more stringent standards of clean up, even greater than might
be needed to protect health and the environment.
Requirement that private-party clean ups be more stringent than
fund-financed clean ups.
Requiring that all clean up settlements contain a reopener clause
thus preventing final release from liability to be granted.
Remove limits of liability and create joint and several liability in
the Leaking Underground Storage Tanks Program.
Expand the rights of citizens to bring suit against owners of waste
disposal sites in Federal court if there may be an iminent or
substantial endangerment.
Creation of a Hazardous Substance inventory as part of the Community
Right-to-Know provision.
In the House, Superfund debate now moves to the House Public works and
Transportation Committee. Subcommittee Chairman Robert Row (D-NJ) has had
the staff working through the August recess preparing for early September markup.
Environmentalists have been urging the committee to begin debate using the
original Florio bill, which was rejected by the Energy and Commerce Committee.
TMA has recommended the Committee begin from H.R. 2817.
The House Ways and Means Committee has tentatively scheduled markup for
e&rLy September. In addition, both the House Judiciary Cosanittee and the
Merchant Marine and Fisheries Counittee have been granted jurisdiction of the
^U. This means that five major committees of the House will have considered
auperfund before it goes to the Rules Counittee and it is brought to the House
•door, as a result, final passage is unlikely before September 30 and thus some
CMA 038323
lapse may wall occur in the taxing authority. A 30 or 60-day dalay should enable
Congress to complete final action before the end of this year.
in the Senate, the Superfund bill, S. SI, was not brought to the floor before
the August recess began as had been predicted. Delays occurred principally
because Senators Domenici (R-NM) and Simpson (R-WY) wanted
to perfect
amendments dealing with liability and insurance issues. These and a host of other
amendments are expected to be considered while Superfund is on the Senate floor in
September.
CMA
CMA 038324
EXHIBIT G
TABLE OF CONTENTS
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
Association issues and Program Report
Me
ADVOCACY OVERVIEW
1
l
2
3
3
ISSUES AND PROGRAM STATUS
III.
Government Control of Chemical Production/Innovation (TSCA)...
4
8
9
10
12
13
15
17
19
20
25
27
29
30
30
35
39
DEPARTMENTAL PROGRAM HIGHLIGHTS
40
41
41
42
42
CMA
CMA 038325
r
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
ASSOCIATION PROGRAM AND ISSUE REPORT
Ai
ADVOCACY OVERVIEW
Congress
The President's offensive to hold the line on federal spending, fend
off tax increases and quell the demand for trade protection will probably
result in a number of vetoes this fall. Aides have reportedly begun
laying the groundwork for possible confrontation with Congress over
spending bills "in order to protect the economy."
After a lengthy debate, House and Senate conferees reached agreement
on the first Budget Resolution for FY 1986, later adopted by the full
House and Senate the same day. It would reduce the fiscal 1986 deficit by
$57.5 billion. The agreement exceeds the $50 billion set by the
Administration and Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker, who
testified that this amount in deficit reduction in FY 86 would be
necessary to keep interest rates from rising.
A Cabinet shakeout appears likely to kicked off by the departure of
Health and Human Services Secretary Margaret Heckler, possibly being
replaced by Jack Svahn, the White House domestic policy chief. Another
Cabinet member said to be targeted for replacement is Agriculture
Secretary John Block. In the aftermath of President Reagan's surgery for
cancer, White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan has been presiding
over Cabinet meetings before the President arrives to sit in.
The President will make trips out of town three or four days a month
to promote his tax reform plan and to stump for Republican candidates
facing reelection.
When Congress returns from its August recess much attention will be
focussed on trade. The protectionist legislation proposed thus far is
directed chiefly against the Japanese, while the trade deficit with Canada
and Europe is growing at a increased rate.
The Congressional adjournment date is uncertain, with several
important issues on the agenda, including appropriations bills, the Farm
bill, highway construction, budget reconciliation and Superfund.
Federal Regulatory Agencies
Environmental Protection Agency
Recently settled enforcement cases dramatize EPA's increased emphasis
on rigorous enforcement of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).
Page
1
CMA 038326
Although EPA has been inspecting for compliance with all sections of TSCA,
the largest fines have been levied for violations of the premanufacture
notice and reporting provisions of TSCA. In one recent settlement, a
substantial fine was reduced because the company voluntarily disclosed the
violations and agreed to perform a company-wide audit for compliance with
TSCA.
Since late June, EPA has been preparing a list of hazardous
substances that it believes should be stringently controlled. Draft lists
have ranged from 50 to 700 chemicals, depending on EPA's selection
criteria. The list, expected to be published during September, will
probably cover 100-200 substances, which will be the targets of EPA and
OSHA inspections.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
On May 30, 1985, FERC moved to stimulate competition in natural gas
markets by publishing a rule. Some parts of the rule are objectionable,
but overall it could improve access to reserves from the outer continental
shelf.
Occupational Safety & Health Administration
OSHA's new draft instruction (CPL 2.65) to Field Officers will
establish a National Pilot Program for inspecting chemical plant
processes. Field Officers are now being trained to conduct process safety
inspections.
Department of Transportation
Senior officials in the Department of Transportation are considering
recommending that the U.S. not continue its talks with the Consultation
Shipping Group (CSG) of developed countries regarding a formal agreement
to oppose cargo reservation. CMA favors continuation of the talks leading
to a formal agreement, and is advocating its support to DOT and the other
Executive Branch departments and agencies involved in the decision.
International
The Congress is increasingly angry about the ever worsening trade
situation, but frustrated in finding a solution. The Representative
Gibbons (H.R. 2451) bill dealing with the use of natural resources is
strongly opposed by the Administration and parts of the business
community. The legislative proposal by Representative Rostenkowski (H.R.
3035) to impose a 25 percent surcharge on imports has gained many
supporters but is considered to be too extreme. The many anti-Japanese
proposals are bolstered by the probable $50 billion trade deficit with
that country. These measures seem too much a departure from traditional
U.S. trade policy for the lawmakers. Meanwhile, the Administration is
forced to deal with the myriad import problems on an industry by industry
basis with remedies available in present law.
Page
2
CMA 038327
The U.S. continues to promote a new GATT round of tariff and non­
tariff bargaining, it is winning support in Europe and with other
countries. The Congress is reluctant but does not yet have the
Administration's request for authority to proceed. This is predicted to
come yet this fall with negotiations proposed to start in 1986. CMA is
preparing its policy recommendations for the legislative process and for
the negotiation phase.
The expected U.S. trade deficit of 5150 billion in 1985 is lamented
by everyone but no real solution is yet in sight. The slight decline of
the dollar has raised some hopes for an early end to the trade problem.
The dollar must drop much further down to make a difference and it will
take many months after the drop to become a significant trade factor.
States
In 1985, the National Conference of State Legislatures polled more
than 300 legislative leaders and legislative research directors asking
what were the key issues challenging the 50 state legislatures. Budget
and tax concerns ranked as the top issues for virtually every legislative
agenda. Some states face tight budgets and are searching for new
revenues. Others are considering the allocation of budget surpluses, tax
reform and tax cuts.
In the natural resources area, the survey cited hazardous wastes as a
top concern for state legislatures. Issues they expect to address include
identification of disposal sites, transportation of materials, regulation
of generators and clean-up efforts.
At a time when federal aid to the states is diminishing and economic
pressures force austerity, state legislatures have worked to meet special
program needs such as education and health care. While the financial
industry is undergoing dramatic technological changes, legislatures are
reshaping their regulatory structures and proposing statutes that
recognize the shifting geographic boundaries of financial institutions.
Many problems remain and major reform efforts may undergo further change
in the coming years.
Media
The media have been focusing increasingly sophisticated attention on
public health and safety matters. This concentration has been growing
since before Bhopal and the recent accidental release at Institute, West
Virginia.
According to researchers the media has been developing the theme of
"corporate acts as the driving force in American society." The up side is
that the public sees business as the problem solver of choice. The down
side is the media loves to find feet of clay on the public's heroes.
Corporate governance issues have been among the top five covered by
the national media. Unlike acute stories such as the Institute release,
Page
3
CMA 038328
Reagan's health, airline accidents -- which may surge to higher levels in
the top five — attention to governance has remained steady over six to
eight months.
The media have identified a growing separation between "grassroots
activists" — such Lois Gibbs' Clearinghouse on Hazardous Waste, the
National Coalition Against Toxic Waste, Ralph Nader's Public Interest
Research Groups (PIRGs) and Greenpeace — and the so-called gang of 10 —
NRDC, Sierra Club, Wildlife, Audubon, Friends of the Earth, etc.
The "gang's" new manifesto, An Environmental Agenda for the Future,
includes issues such as population control, trade policy, nuclear war and
world hunger.
Activists say the traditional groups are becoming irrelevant to
domestic environmental questions and have lost touch with the proven,
time-tested confrontational approach to relationships with government and
business. Recent accidents and incidents have strengthened the
confrontational hand and could give the traditionalists second thoughts
about their recent moves toward more business-like leadership and
cooperative approaches.
II. ISSUES AND PROGRAM STATUS
SUPERFUND
(CERCLA and Old Waste Site Cleanup)
Congressional Developments and Response
Senate Activity. The Senate Finance Coranittee has completed action
and reported to the Senate floor a funding level and mechanism to S. 51,
Superfund reauthorization. They approved freezing the current feedstock
tax and imposing a Superfund excise tax (SET) on manufacturing. SET would
apply to sales of tangible personal property by the person who
manufactured or produced the property. The funding level is $7.5 billion
for the next 5 years with $300 million from feedstocks taxes and $1.2
billion from SET per year. Also, the committee deleted general revenues
from S. 51, mainly to deny funding for the victim assistance demonstration
program.
The Senate Judiciary Committee, which was granted sequential referral
of the referral of the bill, failed to make changes during their referral
time period. Thus members of the Judiciary Committee may offer amendments
on Superfund liability and settlements issues.
Senate floor action is expected to occur in September and number of
amendments will be offered. Of concern to CMA would be amendments to
alter the Finance Committee funding mechanism, that would expand the
conmunity right-to-know provisions and that would add general revenue to
fund the victims assistance demonstration program. Also it is expected
that Senator Robert Stafford (R-CT) will offer am amendment for he the
insurance industry. It would eliminate insurance policy to coverage prior
Rage
4
CMA 038329
r
to 1980 for waste site cleanups and for insurance policies written after
1980 they would specifically state that waste cleanup is covered.
House Activity. The Energy and Commerce Committee reported Superfund
reauthorization legislation, H.R. 2817, on July 25, The legislation
represents support of a bi-partisan coalition led by Representatives John
Dingell (D-MI), Dennis Eckart (D-OH) and Norman Lent (R-NY). Voting
against reporting H.R. 2817 were Representatives James Florio (D-NJ),
Henry Waxman (D-CA) and 8 other committee Democrats.
The legislation focuses primarily on cleaning up inactive hazardous
waste and sites except in an emergency, gives EPA discretion in cleaning
up each site, grants states new authority, requires health assessment at
NPL sites and creates a community right-to-know.
The Public Works s Transportation Committee has completed hearings on
Superfund and will begin mark-up in September. CMA testified twice before
the Water Resources Subcommittee on the Superfund reauthorization issues
and community right-to-know. The Judiciary Committee held two days of
hearings on the settlement and enforcement issues and CMA testified. They
will only have jurisdiction for a short time in September.
The Ways & Mews Committee is not expected to schedule Superfund for
consideration until after the other committees complete action.
Representative Jim Jones (D-OK) has recently introduced the Senate Finance
Committee's Superfund funding package, H.R. 3030. This means it is
unlikely that a House-Senate conference can occur and a bill signed into
law before the taxing authority expires on September 30.
The Superfund Task Group of CMA's Government Relations Committee
continues to advocate CMA's position on both the funding portion and the
programmatic portion of the Superfund issues. The chemical industry's
concern over substantial increase in feedstock taxes is being heard in
- Congress and the probability of encountering positive increases in the
feedstock tax appears to be diminishing. Much more discussion has
developed in Congress about the possible need for some new broad-based
tax. Both of these points were emphasized in the introduction of other
bills in both the House and the Senate. But, an industry coalition has
formed to fight against the enactment in Superfund of a broad-based tax,
including the Finance Cosnittees Superfund excise tax. CMA also continues
to work actively with other industry trade associations to develop
broad-based support for many of the issues.
2. Grassroots Activities
The Grassroots Program continues to respond to the changing
legislative status of the Superfund reauthorization. During early 1985,
most grassroots activity was targeted to Members of the Energy and
Commerce Committee. Those efforts were apparent in the final Energy and
Commerce Committee vote to report H.R. 2817. Of the fourteen Democrats
who voted to report H.R. 2817, eleven had been targeted by the Grassroots
program. Only two targeted Congressmen voted against reporting H.R. 2817.
All seven Republicans who had been targeted voted to report H.R. 2817.
In total, eighteen out of the twenty members who had been targeted by
Page
5
CMA 038330
the grassroots program voted to report H.R. 2817. A table summary of
grassroots activities in the Energy and Commerce Committee follows.
THE ENERGY AND COMMERCE COMMITTEE
CONGRESSMAN/
DISTRICT
MAJORITY
♦John Dingell, D-MI-16
James Scheuer, D-NY-8
Henry Waxman, D-CA-24
Timothy Wirth, D-CO-2
♦Philip Sharp, D-IN-2
James Florio, D-NJ-1
Edward Markey, D-MA-7
♦Thomas Luken, D-OH-1
♦Doug Walgren, D-PA-18
♦Richard Shelby, D-AL-7
♦Billy Tauzin, D-LA-3
♦Dennis Eckart, D-OH-11
B. Richardson, D-NM-3
♦Jim Slattery, D-KS-2
Gerry Sikorski, D-MN-6
Jim Bates, D-CA-44
MINORITY
♦James Broyhill, R-NG-10
♦Edward Madigan, R-IL-15
♦Matt Rinaldo, R-NJ-7
♦Bob Whittaker, R-KS-5
♦Thomas Tauke, R-IA-2
♦Thomas Bliley, R-VA-3
♦Michael Oxley, R-OR-4
♦Howard Nielson, R-UT-3
♦Mike Bilirakis, R-FL-9
♦Dan Schaefer, R-CO-6
♦Fred Eckert, R-NY-30
MET WITH
CONG'MAN
1984
COALITION
MEETING
1985
MET WITH
CONG'MAN
1985
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
COALITION
MEETING
1984
APRIL 17
1985
MEETING
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Page
6
CMA 038331
voted to report H.R. 2817
The Grassroots Program is now concentrating on the House Ways and
Means Committee in addition to a few specific House Public works and
Transportation Committee targets. All companies participating in the
Grassroots Program have been contacted requesting letters and plantmanager visits during August to all Members of these Committees.
In addition to Superfund activities, the CMA Government Relations
Committee's Grassroots Task Group has established goals for the remainder
of 1985 and 1986.
These goals are as follows:
Goal 1:
Identify the issue or issues which will be the primary focal point
for the grassroots program.
(This will be recomnended by the
Government Relations Committee and approved by CMA's Board of
Directors.)
Goal 2:
Determine what grassroots organization is best suited to influence
the new issue or issues.
Goal 3:
Strengthen the grassroots structure and improve participation of Task
Group Members, Grassroots Managers (GRMs), and Congressional Liaison
Representatives (CLRs).
- Determine specific responsibilities of GRMs and CLRs.
- Broaden responsibilities of Task Group.
- Improve communications on issue/issues and results.
- Encourage more initiative.
Goal 4:
Conduct more training.
- Bring GRMs and/or CLRs to Washington to launch new issues,
set goals, and conduct training (November 12, 1985}.
- The Task Group Chairman, Task Group members and the CMA staff
executive to provide on-site training to GRMs and CLRs.
Goal 5:
Establish targets and time frames relative to grassroots efforts on
next issue or issues.
Regulatory Developments and Response
Draft Superfund Health Assessment Manual. The Superfund
Implementation Task Group developed informal comments on EPA's draft
Superfund Health Assessment Manual. The manual will be used by EPA
personnel to guide the Agency's actions at site cleanups. Although
generally supportive of the draft document, CMA's comments recommended
several points to help improve the final EPA work product.
Draft EPA Guidance Document for Providing Alternative water Supplies.
The Superfund Implementation Task Group developed informal comments on
EPA's draft guidance on providing alternative water supplies. The
Page
7
CMA 038332
guidance manual will be used by EPA personnel to assist in Superfund site
cleanup activities. CMA's informal comments were designed to correct
substantive problems observed in the draft guidance document.
Communications
in a three month period, June through August, 84 national and
regional media briefings have been completed by CMA/metnber company teams.
That amounts to more calls than were completed in six months in 1984.
The editorial board response has again been positive with balanced
editorial treatment in the key national press — the New York Times, wall
Street Journal and the Washington Post — as well as leading regional
newspapers.
In addition to national releases special materials were targeted to
specific states and districts. This localized material (Texas impact for
Texas, etc.) went to 30 major market areas.
A new, and very successful approach, was for CMA to serve as an
alternative network for distribution of information not covered by the
commercial networks.
Thirteen Congressmen, fearing that reauthorization was in danger,
crafted a compromise. Major national special interest groups immediately
attacked the members in their districts for straying from a hard line.
CMA filmed the members' press conference; supplied same day
television coverage to stations in their districts; surveyed usage and
compiled a report; supplied the members with copies of the materials and
records of use in their districts.
New areas are being targeted for Superfund media tours as Congress
returns in September.
Public Compensation
Congressional Developments and Response
Product Liability. Senator John Danforth (R-MO), Chairman of the
Senate Commerce Committee, has released a new staff working draft of
product liability legislation. This effort is designed to break current
deadlock on product liability legislation. The deadlock emerged in May
when a motion to report Senator Robert Kasten's bill failed on an eight to
eight vote.
The staff draft combines uniform federal product liability standards
— the focus of the Kasten bill — with a new alternative claim system.
This system provides an injured party with an alternative to litigation.
Anyone harmed by a product could submit an expedited claim for a limited
range of damages to the manufacturer. A manufacturer who pays these
damages or declines to pay a claim solely ^because of a dispute over the
Page
8
CMA 038333
amount of damages may not be sued for damages arising out of the same
harm. CMA intends to submit its views on the draft to Senator Danforth.
ujjite Handling and Disposal
Regulatory Developments and Response
Streamlining State RCRA Revisions. The RCRA Regulations Task Group
developed comments on EPA's proposed regulations to streamline state
revisions. CMA's comments supported EPA's regulatory reform proposals
that procedurally simplify the rulemaking process.
Draft Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP). The
Environmental Monitoring Task Group developed informal comments on EPA's
TCLP methodology. The TCLP will be used by EPA for determining whether
certain substances are hazardous under RCRA. CMA's comments identified
technical and scientific problems with the methodology as it is presently
set forth. The task group is working with EPA and other trade groups to
refine the methodology so that it meets EPA's and industry's needs.
Technical and Research Activities
Solid Waste Technology Workshop. The Solid Waste Technology Task
Group sponsored a workshop for solid waste experts. The workshop, attended
by 40 member company representatives, provided an opportunity to discuss
common problems and exchange ideas on solid waste technology matters.
Xnterassociatlon TCLP Research Project. The Environmental Management
Committee approved participation in an interassociation project to study
EPA's TCLP methods to verify the precision and accuracy of the procedures,
v Other organizations participating in the project are the American Iron and
Steel Institute, American Mining Congress, American Textile Manufacturers
Institute, Edison Electric Institute, and American Lead Industry. The
goal of the project is to provide data and information that will result in
revisions to the TCLP methods.
Waste Minimization Guidance. The RCRA Regulations Task Group
developed a guidance document offering member companies recommendations on
how to comply with the new RCRA waste minimization certification
provisions. The document, rather than stating one way to comply, offers
member companies options to be considered in developing a plan to comply
with the requirements that take effect in November 1985.
Litigation and Related Activities
Definition of Solid Waste. On April 4, 1985, CMA moved to intervene
in American Mining Congress v. Environmental Protection Agency, No.
85-1206 (D.C. Cir.) This case involves a challenge to EPA's new
definition of solid waste, published as a final rule on January 4, 1985.
CMA's motion to intervene has been granted.
CMA became involved in this case for two reasons. First, CMA has
teen closely associated with' the development of the new definition of
Page
CM* 038334
solid waste and therefore was interested in continuing this involvement
to assure that our members' interests are protected, in addition, the
final rule has deviated from the proposal in one significant respect: it
brings within the definition of solid waste on-site reclamation activities
that are a part of a chemical process. As a result, CMA members may be
faced with having to apply for RCRA permits for many hundreds of
reclamation processes and associated storage tanks. CMA has met with EPA
to determine whether alternative regulatory schemes can be developed that
will address EPA's concerns while excluding these operations which are
clearly a part of chemical processes.
Communications
"Cleaning Up", the new waste site cleanup film, has been completed
and is in distribution. The film is intended to demonstrate the progress
being made in cleanup and features a roundtable discussion between Lee
Thomas, EPA administrator. Bill Reilly, Conservation Foundation, Chuck
Powers, Clean Sites Inc., Penny Newman, California environmental activist
and Tom Heilman, former EMC chairman.
Initial distribution will be in 13 key "chemical” production states
to commercial, cable and educational television stations and adult commu­
nity groups. The community information task group of the Communications
Coimnittee is active in placing the program.
In addition member companies are using the film for internal
audiences. With promotion just beginning, more than 50 films and tapes
have been sold and 60 are being previewed.
Safe Drinking Water/Groundwater
Congressional Developments and Response
Safe Drinking Water
Senate Activity. The Senate bill, S. 124, introduced by Sen. David
Durenberger (R-MN), amends the Safe Drinking Water Act. The bill focuses
on setting drinking water standards and regulating public water systems.
CMA generally supports S. 124, believing most of our concerns have been
addressed. We particularly support the decision not to include
comprehensive groundwater protection provisions. The bill passed the
Senate by voice vote May 16.
House Activity. The House bill, H.R. 1650, introduced by Rep.
Madigan (R-IL) passed the House by voice vote June 17. The bill differs
from the Senate bill in two key areas: standard-setting and groundwater
protection.
it looks as though the SDWA Conference will not take place until
September. Although Congressional staff predict that the conference will
go smoothly, there may be controversy over groundwater protection - a
state groundwater planning program in the House bill (H.R. 1650) that is
absent from the Senate bill. The Senate conferees are opposed to major
Page
10
CMA 038335
groundwater protection provisions in the SDW reauthorization. Senator
Durenberger wants separate federal legislation to protect groundwater and
expects to introduce a bill in the fall (see groundwater section).
In addition the bills differ in standard setting, judicial review and
authorization levels, but Hill staffers expect compromise on these
issues.
CMA will be supporting the Senate bill over the House bill on three
issues: standard setting, no comprehensive groundwater protection
program, and the Senate critical aquifer demonstration program instead of
the House sole source.
Groundwater
Senator Oave Durenberger (R-MN) has held three hearings as he pre­
pares to introduce his groundwater protection bill this fall.
The first two hearings, held on June 17 and 20 were on groundwater
quality and quantity, contamination and policy issues, and state efforts.
The third hearing, focused on EPA's groundwater protection strategy, which
calls for EPA to provide financial assistance to the states. Additional
hearings will be held in Washington in September and October, which is
when CMA will testify. Senator Durenberger plans on circulating a draft
bill for comment in September.
2. Technical and Research Activities
Application of Risk Analysis to Groundwater Issues. The Risk
Assessment Task Group conducted a review of the application of risk
analysis concepts to groundwater issues. The review focused previous work
in developing risk analysis methods on the specific problems associated
with groundwater contamination. Future activity will identify the
application of risk analysis methods to establish acceptable exposure
levels to substances found in groundwater.
Definition of Key Groundwater Terms. The Groundwater Management Task
Group developed a glossary of definitions of key groundwater terms.
The definitions will assure consistent use of key terms in all CMA
groundwater work products.
Groundwater Containment and Treatment Technologies. The Water
Technology Task Group developed a summary of existing groundwater
containment and treatment technologies. The summary is available to
member companies and CICs for their use in addressing groundwater
matters.
Alternate Supplies of Drinking Water. The Groundwater Task Group
developed a paper on alternate supplies of drinking water where
contamination exists. This paper is an elaboration of a previously
approved Superfund position on alternate supplies of drinking water. The
work product will be used by the State Affairs Committee in addressing
state groundwater legislative matters.
Page
11
CMA 038336
Underground Injection Control Project. Seventeen companies have
agreed to participate in a specially funded activity addressing potential
bans under RCRA of the underground injection of hazardous wastes. The
group includes CMA members and other companies that use underground
injection as a disposal mechanism for a manufacturing facility. The
primary objective of the group is to develop relevant technical data and
information for submittal to EPA in order to impact on EPA's regulatory
decision making process.
Communications
A committee task group has completed a communication and media
relations plan for groundwater advocacy.
Government Control of Chemical Production/Innovation (TSCA)
Regulatory Developments and Response
Comprehensive Reporting. On July 17 and 30, EPA held public meetings
to review a draft reporting rule that EPA plans to develop but has not yet
formally proposed. EPA would issue the comprehensive reporting rule under
the authority of Section 8(a) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).
The rule would establish an extensive list of questions and Agency
procedures for making chemicals subject to the rule. Once the model .rule
has been established, EPA would tailor the rule to ask certain questions
about particular chemical substances.
While such a model rule may establish consistent information requests
to companies, the draft reporting form includes burdensome questions and
questions related to EPA programs other than TSCA. As of yet, EPA has not
developed an Agency procedure to prevent duplicative information requests
under this draft rule. The Health and Safety Committee's Notification and
Reporting Task Group is reviewing the draft and will submit comments to
EPA in early October.
Negotiated Testing. From March through July, CMA, EPA, and the
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) worked to develop a procedure for
negotiating test agreements and developing test rules under TSCA Section 4.
This collaborative effort grew out of CMA's appeal of a District Court
decision that invalidated EPA's previous procedures for negotiating test
agreements under TSCA Section 4.
The guiding principle in developing this new procedure has been that
test rules and negotiated testing agreements should be equivalent.
Consent orders under TSCA Section 4 would be the primary mechanism to
satisfy that principle. As with test rules, the consent orders would
include requirements to ensure adequate and reliable data, would be
enforceable, and would require export notification under TSCA Section
12(b). In addition to these features of the consent order, the new
procedures would include an opportunity for public participation, an
expedited schedule for negotiating and rulemaking, and a change in
Interagency Testing Committee (ITC) procedures to provide sufficient time
Page
12
CMA 038337
to either negotiate agreements or prepare rules on chemicals the
ITC nominates to EPA for testing consideration.
In August, the final draft of the preamble and procedural rule were
reviewed by the Health and Safety Committee. After sign-off by
the parties involved, EPA will issue the procedures as an interim final
rule in the fall.
Technical and Research Activities
PMN Exposure Assessment
The Exposure Assessment Task Group reviewed, commented on, and
discussed with EPA that Agency's draft guidance for preparing engineering
analyses. EPA plans to use the analyses to estimate exposures to PMN
substances. EPA is now revising its guidelines and plans to seek
additional outside review of the document.
Identifying Acute Hazards
CMA reviewed EPA's draft criteria for identifying acute hazards, and
submitted comments to the Science Advisory Board. EPA generally followed
a logical approach in its criteria, but used incomplete methods for
assessing potential harm and potential exposure, failed to ensure the use
of accurate data, omitted significant limitations in methodology from its
discussion, and did not focus its criteria on the intended purpose for
which materials were to be identified.
International Regulation
On August 21, CMA President Bob Roland and SCCMA president Ron Lang
signed a joint letter addressed to the Administrator of EPA, Administrator
of OSHA, Director of Office of OMB and the U.S. Trade Representative,
transmitting for their information and use the finished work product of
the Joint IAG/CEFIC/CCPA Work Group on Assessment of Chronic Hazards.
This report represents the effort of a distinguished group of
toxicologists from the U.S., Europe, and Canada to harmonize definitions
on carcinogens, mutagens, and teratogens. The work was initiated over a
year ago and required major coordinating meetings in both Brussels and
Washington. It represents the first international agreement of industrial
groups on terminology and is an excellent first step in developing better
international cooperation between the U.S. and its major trading
partners.
International Trade/Intemational Competition
Congressional Developments and Response
Revision of Trade Remedy Laws
As he did in the last Congress, Rep. Sam Gibbons (D-7-FL) has
introduced a bill to amend countervailing duty laws by defining as a
subsidy the practice of using natural resource raw^materials not available
Page
13
to foreign investors for the production of finished goods. This provision
was included in a bill which passed the House by a sizeable margin in the
last Congress. The natural resources provision was deleted by the
House/Senate Conference which produced the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984.
The current Gibbons bill (H.R. 2451) would require the U.S. manufacturer
to prove that injury has occurred before countervailing duties could be
imposed. The addition of this injury test is an attempt to achieve
support from the Administration for the concept. The Administration,
however, still views the proposal as protectionist and is opposing it.
The Trade Subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee has
already held several days of hearings on the issue, and plans additional
hearings in the fall.
The CMA Executive Committee declined to take a position on the
natural resources issue at its March 6, 1984 meeting.
Import Surcharge
Representative Dan Rostenkowski (D-8th-IL) has introduced a bill
which would impose an import surcharge on all goods from selected
countries. The bill was introduced with 65 co-sponsors, but a substantial
additional number of Congressmen are expected to also co-sponsor the bill.
Hearings on this matter are planned for early Fall.
The bill would apply to all countries whose 1984 imports to the U.S.
exceeded $14 billion. One half of this initial amount, or $7 billion, is
to be indexed in future years to the 1984 U.S. Gross National Product.
Any country which meets the above eligibility must keep its ratio of
imports to the United States to exports from the United States below 1.5
(or ratios of world-wide imports to exports below 1.65). If it fails to
do so, all imports from that country will be assessed a 25 percent ad
valorem rate of duty which is in addition to any existing duty already in
use.
Earlier this year, the Motorola Corporation proposed an
across-the-board import surcharge for three years as a means of combatting
the deficit. Such a proposal has yet to be introduced as legislation.
CMA's International Trade Committee has held preliminary discussions
on the concept of an import surcharge. It appears that the Committee is
opposed to an across-the-board imposition of additional duties, but it has
not yet decided whether to take a position.
International Negotiations/Agreements
U.S,/Israel Free Trade Agreement
The U.S./Israel Free Trade Agreement (FTA) has been passed by the
Congress and signed into law. it becomes effective in September.
Under the provisions of the agreement, virtually all duties will be
eliminated on goods imported into the United States from Israel. Certain
import sensitive items, including most bromine chemicals, will have duties
Page
14
CMA 038339
phased out over a ten year period rather than having them eliminated
immediately. The FTA does require that goods imported from Israel must
have had a minimum of 35 percent of the value of the good added in Israel.
Also under the FTA, the U.S. International Trade Commission is required
to conduct a study after five years to determine if any industries or
products have suffered harm as a result of the agreement.
The CMA did not establish a position on this agreement because it was
judged to be certain of success. However, member companies were kept
fully informed of developments and of how they could take action in their
own best interests.
occupational Safety and Health
Congressional Developments and Response
worker Right-to-Know. Rep. Joseph Gaydos' (D-PA) Health and Safety
Subcommittee began hearings July 17 on concepts underlying his High Risk
Occupational Disease Notification and Prevention Act, HR 1309. This bill,
in essence crafted at the behest of the AFL/CIO, would require the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to establish
a system for identifying, notifying and preventing illness among workers
who are at increased risk of occupational disease. Dr. Bruce Karrh,
testifying on behalf of du Pont, expressed concerns about establishing an
entire new bureaucracy for communication of hazard information which could
be better handled by existing programs under OSHA.
CMA's Health and Safety Committee is reviewing HR 1309 and expects to
testify in September when hearings resume. Congressman Gaydos has
indicated he intends to complete hearings this year and report the bill
out of committee early next year.
Occupational Disease Compensation. Rep. Pat Williams (D-MT)
recently introduced HR 3090 which would establish an employer/
manufacturer insurance fund to compensate workers who contract asbestosis
and other occupational diseases. This is successor legislation to the
Hiller bill (HR 3175) of the last Congress. Strong AFL/CIO support of
HR 3090 assures favorable attention by the House Education and Labor
Committee. CMA's Health and Safety Committee will be reviewing the
legislation, particularly its broadened occupational disease trigger
mechanism.
Community Right-to-Know (RTK).
In the Senate, Alphonse D'Amato
(R-NY) has been working on a possible Superfund floor amendment to provide
the government and the public with information about the potential dangers
of hazardous substances and a coordinated system for emergency response.
Senator D'Amato chaired a hearing of the Small Business Committee at which
EPA, local govemment/emergency response officials, and small business .
testified as to their reservations about the inventory/emissions "mass
balance" data reporting requirements in Senator Lautenberg's amendment to
S 51 previously reported by the Environment and Public Works Committee.
CMA is working with a coalition of small business associations led by
SOCMA to achieve more practical legislative results. Concepts developed
Page
15
CMA 038340
by the International Association of Firechiefs will be a key factor in
Senator D*Amato's anticipated legislation. We expect to support Senator
D'Amato's efforts. As soon as his language is finalized, a major effort
will be made by CMA companies to generate support for the D*Amato approach
as a constructive alternative to the Lautenberg amendments to S SI.
In
the meantime, Senator Lautenberg (D-NJ) introduced a new bill dealing with
emergency response, S 1531, which he intends to offer as a floor amendment
to Superfund. Although it is significantly scaled down from prior drafts,
the new bill appears to raise problems which CMA's Health and Safety
Committee will be reviewing during the August Congressional recess.
In the House, the Energy and Commerce Committee marked up and
reported out HR 2817 with community RTK provisions essentially intact.
The Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) were preserved as the vehicle for
hazards communication. Emergency response provisions are consistent with
CMA's CAER program. An inventory/emissions reporting amendment (similar
to Senator Lautenberg's) was defeated by the Committee. Trade secret
protection was made consistent with the OSHA hazard communication
standard. The Committee approved a limited preemption of state and local
laws adopted after August 1, 1985. A great deal of effort by CMA and its
member companies resulted in a final RTK product by the Energy and
Commerce Committee which we are generally pleased with and can support in
the House as a better approach than other existing proposals.
Also in the House, the Public Works Subcommitte on Water Resources,
chaired by Robert Roe (D-NJ), held a hearing July 25 on community RTK as
part of its consideration Superfund. John Jones of Dow Chemical, and
Chairman of our CAER task group, testified on behalf of CMA and stressed
the need for a practical approach to emergency response. Members of the
Public works Conmittee are becoming interested in RTK/emergency response,
and may wish to offer their own amendments as part of Superfund. We will be
working with the business coalition to make them as close to HR 2817 as
possible, or otherwise improve proposals in that Committee.
Technical and Research Activities
Labeling. The Health and Safety Committee's Labeling Task Group met
August 1 to begin updating the 1982 version of the American National
Standard for hazardous industrial chemicals/precautionary labeling. CMA
will assume once again the role of canvassing sponsor for the standard.
The major consideration of the Labeling Task Group will be to address
the precautionary labeling of chronic hazards.
Litigation and Related Legal Activities
Hazard Communication Litigation. On May 24, 1985, the Third Circuit
Court of Appeals ruled that the OSHA hazard communication standard
preempts state right-to-know laws as they apply to manufacturers. United
Steelworkers of America v, Auchter, 763 F.2d 728 (3d Cir. 1985 ). CMA
intervened in the case to argue for preemption and to defend the
standard's trade secret provision. The court left open the question of
whether state right-to-know laws that cover employers beyond the
manufacturing sector and that have community right-to-know provisions are
preempted by the federal hazard communication standard. The Court said
Page
16
CMA 038341
that question must be answered by examining each state law to determine if
the provisions are "inextricably intertwined." There are two cases, pending
in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, where preemption of right-to-know laws
outside the manufacturing sector and in the community is an issue.
The Court also ordered OSHA to amend its definition of "trade secret"
and in doing so, not to go beyond the common law definition. OSHA was
also ordered to provide for employee access (both the manufacturer's
employees as well as downstream employees) to trade secret information.
The standard currently provides such access only to health professionals.
No party has petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case. At this
time, it appears there will be a new rulemaking on the trade secret
issues, and OSHA will also publish an advanced notice of proposed
rulemaking on the issue of expanding the scope of coverage of the
standard, which was also ordered by the Court.
communications
Institute: CMA received and responded to 400 media calls in five
days following the accidental release at Institute. Spokesmen appeared on
ABC's Nightline, CNN's Newsmakers, CBS's Nightwatch and a number of radio
network programs. Assistance was also provided to CXC spokesmen f<->r
regional appearances.
Special marketing research techniques are being adapted to analyze
audience response to industry messages about plant safety emergency
response and risk management.
Clean Air
Congressional Developments and Response
Dingell Survey. CMA transmitted to Congressman John Dingell (D-MI)
on June 21 responses to his April 3 letter requesting that CMA conduct
surveys in three study areas regarding monitoring and detection of
chemical releases into the air and emergency response systems among
chemical plants. The transmittal to Dingell included the individual
survey questionnaires which CMA member companies completed for
approximately 90 chemical plants located in Baton Rouge-New Orleans,
Philadelphia- Wilmington-South New Jersey, and Buffalo-Niagara Falls. CMA
has written members of Congress whose districts fall within the survey
areas to inform them about the survey and to indicate that they will
receive CMA's analysis. CMA's Clean Air Act Task Group plans visits to
the 22 members of Congress to deliver the analysis.
House Activity. The Toxic Release Control Act (H.R. 2576),
introduced by Congressman Henry Waxman (D-CA), was the topic of two days
of hearings in June before Waxman's Health and the Environment
Subcomnittee. CMA testified on June 11th that H.R. 2576 is not an
effective and efficient approach to potential public health risks
presented by the release of toxic chemicals into the air; that a bill must
distinguish more clearly between large volume accidental release of
Page
17
CMA 038342
acutely toxic materials and low-level exposures to substances over longer
periods of time; and, that CMA is prepared to help Congress design
appropriate legislation while continuing to develop and implement new
initiatives to control hazardous air pollutants. Also during the June 11
hearings, Congressman John Dingell (D-MI) voiced strong opposition to H.R.
2576. At the other day of hearings, there were industry witnesses,
representing aluminum, electric power, motor vehicles and consumer
products. An effort to affix portions of H.R. 2576 to the Superfund
legislation failed during mark-up in the Energy and Commerce Committee.
Even if Waxman succeeds in getting a bill out of his subcommittee, full
committee consideration seems unlikely.
Senate Activity. In the Senate, committee hearings might get under
way this fall on clean air amendments as a whole.
Regulatory Developments and Response
Revised Particulate Matter Standard. The Air Pollution Effects Task
Group developed comments on EPA's proposed revisions to the particulate
matter national ambient air quality standard. CMA's comments highlight
several scientific and technical deficiencies in the proposal. The final
standard will be the basis for states revising the state implementation
plan for particulate matter.
Hew Source Performance Standards. The Process Emissions Regulation
Task Group developed consents on EPA's proposed air oxidation processes and
distillation operations new source performance standards. These consents
were in response to EPA* s reopening the consent period and requesting
additional comments on its TRE regulatory model. CMA was generally
supportive of EPA's proposed approach on its cost-effectiveness model,
although we offered several technical recommendations to improve its
applicability.
Vinyl Chloride HESHAPS Judicial Intervention. The Environmental
Management Committee authorized CMA's intervention in a judicial suit
supporting EPA's proposed revisions of the vinyl chloride hazardous air
pollutant standard. This litigation will resolve the question of whether
EPA is properly interpreting Section 112 of the Clean Air Act in
developing standards that assure an "ample margin of safety".
Technical and Research Activities
Dingell Survey Report. The Process Emission Regulations Task Group
and its Monitoring Work Group have completed the analysis of a survey
requested by Congressman Dingell of chemical industrial plant air
monitoring. The survey was conducted in three distinct areas — Hew
Orleans-Baton Rouge, Hiagara Falls, and Philadelphia-WilmingtonSouth Hew Jersey. The final report will be submitted to Congressman
Dingell and to the Office of Technology Assessment.
Air Task Groups Sunsetting. The Environmental Management Committee
disbanded the Air Regulations Task Group and the Toxics Integration Task
Group. The activities of the Air Regulations Task Group will be conducted
by a work group of the Process Emission Regulations Task Group. The
Page
18
CMA 038343
activities of the Toxics Integration Task Group will be conducted by a
work group of the Air Pollution Effects Task Group.
Litigation and Related Activities
Vinyl Chloride Litigation. CMA has moved to intervene in a court
suit brought by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) challenging
EPA's emission standards for vinyl chloride under section 112 of the Clean
Air Act. This case will probably be the first to decide the meaning of
the "ample margin of safety" test of section 112. NRDC contends that
section 112 requires ERA to set "zero-risk, zero-emmissions" standards for
all carcinogens. CMA and the American Petroleum Institute, who also
intervened, will argue in support of EPA's position in the case, that the
Agency is authorized to taka cost and feasibility into account in setting
emission standards under section 112. NRDC filed its brief on June 17,
with EPA's response submitted on July 25. The CMA/API brief will be filed
on August 19. A decision is expected by the spring of 1986.
Clean Water
Congressional Developments and Response
Clean Water Legislation. The Senate approved S. 1128 by a vote of
94-0 on June 13th. In the House, Congressman Robert Roe (D-NJ) worked out
a block of committee amendments to H.R. 8 which CMA and industry
representatives discussed with Roe. On July 23, the House passed H.R. 8
by a vote of 340-83. Despite the threat of a White House veto because of
construction grant funding, it appears possible that Congress will
complete work on s. 1128 before this session ends. S. 1128 and the
House-passed version reflect CMA efforts for extensions, modifications
deletions and report language clarifications. The bills are improved over
original proposals in several areas CMA sought including: extended
compliance deadlines; increased protection against citizen suits relative
to administrative penalties; affirmative defense under criminal penalties;
narrowing of the mandatory reopener requirements in NPDES permits;
affirmation of the Fundamentally Different Factors (FDF) variance although
with some procedural limitations; and a provision improving stormwater
run-off requirements. CMA currently is preparing for conference activity
in September.
Regulatory Developments and Response
Pretreatment. The Effluent Guidelines Task Group developed comments
on EPA's proposed revisions to its pretreatment regulations. The
proposal revises the definitions of "interference” and "pass through” for
purposes of determining extent of pretreatment control necessary. CMA's
comments generally supported the changes since they brought the
definitions more in line with our original views on this matter.
EPA Biomonitoring. The Water Quality Criteria and Standards Task
Group developed comments on EPA's biomonitoring study conducted in Lima,
Ohio. EPA requested CMA to peer review the study. CMA's comments were
?age
19
CMA 038344
generally supportive of the study and how it was conducted, and offered
constructive comments on how to improve the report.
Technical and Research Activities
Effluent Guidelines Seminar. The Effluent Guidelines Task Group
developed and conducted a seminar on EFA's proposed revisions to the
organic chemical, plastics, and synthetic fibers effluent guidelines. The
seminar was attended by approximately ISO member company representatives.
Speakers were from the task group, CMA staff, CMA consultants, and
representatives from EPA.
Permit Limitations Uncertainty/Variability. The Environmental
Monitoring Task Group developed a technical paper highlighting
uncertainty and variability in a wide spectrum of environmental areas. Of
specific concern are NPDES permit limitations and the documented degree of
uncertainty and variability that exists. The paper elaborates on this
points since these questionable numerical limitations can form the basis
for EPA enforcement actions and/or citizen suits with potentially
significant penalties being imposed.
Litigation and Related Legal Activities
NPDES Citizen Suits. A federal district court in Virginia has issued
the first civil penalty award in an enforcement ease brought by a citizen
under the Clean Water Act. The penalty was based on a series of permit
violations that occurred over approximately three years. The court
performed a lengthy, detailed review of the factual situation and assessed
different penalties for various violations depending on the specific
circumstances (ranging from $50/day to $4,000/day). The decision is being
appealed to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. If upheld, the ruling
could serve as an important precedent for the many other courts now faced
with similar citizen suit claims.
Chemical Product Distribution
Congressional Developments and Responno
Hazardous Materials Transportation
The reauthorization of Superfund legislation and increased
Congressional attention regarding hazardous substance and safety issues
have intensified discussions pertaining to the transport of hazardous
materials and emergency response. Hazardous materials transportation
issues are expected to be included in hearings on environmental matters.
Representative James J. Florio (D-NJ-1) has sponsored a measure that
includes the creation of a federal regional training program on hazardous
chemicals. Senator Frank R. Lautenberg (D-NJ) has offered legislation
that requires contingency planning and an inventory of hazardous materials
transported. He has also introduced a community emergency response and
right-to-know bill that may be offered on the Senate floor as an amendment
to the Superfund bill.
Page
20
CMA 038345
CMA is monitoring proposals affecting the movement of hazardous
materials. Input is being provided for a Congressionally-mandated study
by the Office of Technology Assessment. Discussions are being conducted
with a hazardous materials advisory task group at the Department of
Transportation regarding initiatives to insure more efficient and safe
transportation of hazardous materials. CMA also continues to participate
in a coalition with public and private sector groups in seeking a
consensus approach to federal/state/local uniformity of hazardous
materials transportation regulations.
Rail Competition
Hearings are expected to continue after the August recess in both the
Senate and House Judiciary Committees regarding antitrust implications of
railroad rate practice. The Rail Antitrust Monopoly Act offered by
Senator Dennis DeConcini (D-AZ) and Representative John D. Sieberling
(D-OH-14) is the subject of discussion and is undergoing redrafting.
Bills have been introduced that would curb high railroad rates and
protect captive shippers by way of regulatory changes by Senator Russell
D. Long (D-LA) and Mark Andrews (R-ND) and Representatives W. j.
"Billy" Tauzin (D-LA-3) and Nick Jo Rahall (D-WV-4). Legislation that
would set standards for rail rates and determining when rail carriers have
market dominance has also been introduced by Senator Wendell H. Ford
(D-KY) and Representative Rahall. Hearings have not been scheduled, but
activity may occur in the session when the Interstate Commerce Commission
(ICC) completes a rulemaking presently underway that addresses rail
competition. The bills introduced have not received the support of the
Administration. Some Congressional support is further present for linking
rail competition issues and protection for captive shippers with
legislative proposals under consideration to transfer Conrail to the
private sector.
Differing views exist among the many shipping coalitions that have
been formed as to whether the Staggers Rail Act of 1980 needs refinement,
major amendment or left to proper implementation by the ICC. CMA
continues to work to maintain and enhance rail-to-rail competition and
insure proper implementation of existing law. Negotiations with the
railroads have resulted in some agreement with regard to pro-competitive
access issues. The agreement between CMA and the American Association of
Railroads (AAR) has resulted in am ICC proposed rulemaking and would
basically obviate the need for legislation on matters addressed.
Discussions with congressional leaders and ad hoc groups continue as
legislative measures ire proposed.
Conrail
Bipartisan bills have been introduced that would sell the
Consolidated Rail Corporation (Conrail) to an investor group formed by
Morgan Stanley & Co., Inc. The legislation provided for the sale of the
government's 85 percent share of the freight system for $1.2 billion and
resale of at least €0 percent of the railroad to the public through one or
more stock offerings within five years.
vage
21
CMA 038346
The Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee reported
bill would authorize the sale of Conrail to the Norfolk southern
Corporation. The Administration is supporting the private offering to
Norfolk Southern as the result of a DOT approved bid process. Opposition
to a Conrail merger with Norfolk Southern continues regarding
antitrust/competitive implications and the tax benefits that would derive.
Senate Judiciary Committee amendments to the Administration bill are
expected, and there is indication that a filibuster could occur.
On the House side, the hearing process will continue after the August
recess. The use of Conrail tax deductions as well as the antitrust
aspects of a merger are under review by the House Ways and Means Committee
and the House Judiciary Committee, respectively. Additional hearings will
be held before the House Energy and Connerce Subcommittee on Commerce,
Transportation and Tourism.
The Morgan Stanley plan, backed by Conrail management and
will be the primary focus of hearings in the fall. Supporters
amendments to the Staggers Bail Act to provide captive shipper
may also attempt to link other rail issues with the passage of
Conrail enabling legislation.
rail labor,
of
protection
the sale of
Concern has been expressed during hearings that provisions must be
included in any Conrail sale agreement to assure competition. CMA has
advocated the assurance of rail competition in the Northeast Corridor.
The Morgan Stanley Company proposal for a public offering is supported by
CMA as the most viable option for the disposition of Conrail.
Regulatory Development and Response
Conrail Acquisition. The Distribution Cosuittee developed a position
paper on the Administration's proposal to sell the Conrail system to the
Norfolk/Southem Railroad Corporation. Of primary concern is the
reduction in competitive service that may occur if Conrail is sold to
Norfolk Southern. CMA believes a public sale of Conrail, as proposed by
Morgan Stanley fi Company, would not reduce competitive rail service in the
Eastern O.S.» therefore, CMA supports the Morgan Stanley proposal.
Rates and Compensation
Tank Car Compensation. CMA, other tank car providers, and the
railroads have successfully arrived at an agreement on the appropriate
level of compensation for tank car use. This level of payout is $554
million. The issues of enforceability and the form and duration of the
agreement have also been resolved. The joint agreement has been submitted
to the ICC for rulemaking.
Rail to Rail Competition. A compromise agreement between CMA and the
railroads on the issue of competitive access to shipping facilities has
been reached. This agreement is intended to enhance the competitive
alternatives available to chemical shippers by allowing rail carriers to
compete for freight when they do not control the track immediately serving
a plant.
"age
22
CMA 038347
CMA and the railroads have jointly petitioned the ICC to enact our
agreement. CMA also submitted a supplemental petition to expand the scope
of the rulemaking by including the concepts of proportional rates and
terminal facilities. CMA participated in oral argument on July 18 and
anticipates the ICC ruling on the issues by mid-September.
On July 17, the ICC issued a 4-3 decision in Midtee vs. CNW that, if
upheld, could substantially undermine the benefits of the agreeme-4reached with railroads. The Commission ruled that before it will order
competitive access for the competing carrier, the controlling carrier must
be shown to be market dominant and charging an unreasonably high rate.
CMA is considering intervening in the appeal of the Midtec case.
Product and Geographic Competition. Before a shipper may challen^ rail rate as being unreasonably high, the shipper must demonstrate th~*
the railroad has "market dominance" over the traffic. Two factors being
considered are whether the receiver can obtain the product from other
sources (geographic competition) or can obtain substitute products
(product competition). On July 31, 1985, the ICC announced that it will
modify its product and geographic competition guidelines. The major
changes will be (1) that the railroad must bear the burden of proving
these issues, and (2) the effect of geographic competition will be viewed
differently, depending on whether the shipper is the receiver originator
of the product. The ICC adopted a few of CMA's suggested changes to the
proposed rules, but rejected our'most significant changes, as well as
CMA's petition for a supplemental rulemaking that would have applied a
Herfindahl market share analysis to the market dominance issue.
Coal Rate Guidelines. The ICC recently adopted the criteria by which
it will judge the reasonableness of coal rates. The criteria are likely
to be proposed for chemical rates in a separate rulemaking soon. The
criteria would permit a railroad to charge a rate based on what it would
hypothetically cost the shipper to build and maintain a rail line for its
traffic. The rate must also reflect contributions to the cost by other
shippers and efficient operations by the railroad.
Argentina/Brazil Cargo Reservation Laws. CMA developed evidence
demonstrating the adverse effects resulting from the cargo reservation
laws enacted by Argentina and Brazil. Conments setting forth the
industry's concerns were submitted to the Federal Maritime Commission.
CMA participated in a delegation of government officials that undertook a
fact-finding mission to Brazil to determine the anticompetitive impact of
the Brazilian laws.
Chemical Bulk Parcel Rates. CMA is opposing efforts by chemical bulk
parcel tanker operators to obtain antitrust immunity to collectively set
rates. CMA believes that competitive pricing is essential and is filing
comnents before the Federal Maritime Commission and seeking legislative
action toward this end.
CHEMTREC
CHEMTHEC activity continues to be well above last year's levels.
Total calls are running 32% above last year and emergency reports are 34%
"age
23
CMA 038348
above last year's totals for the period January through July. We believe
the increases are a result of heightened awareness about the CHEMTREC
program and increased public concern about incidents involving chemicals.
CHEMTREC Workshops. The third Emergency Response Team Workshop will
be held in Baltimore, Maryland at the end of October.
Instruction for
this workshop will be handled by instructors from the Delaware Fire
School.
CHEMNET. Based on a meeting on June 18, 1985, with CMA members, the
CHEMNET Policy Statement and Agreement and the CHEMNET Operating Rules
were revised and resubmitted to the membership on July 1, 1985, for
their consideration.
As of August 16, we have received 20 participant agreements and 16
subscriber agreements from CMA members. These 36 companies represent a
large percentage of the chemicals shipped in this country. We have also
received verbal confirmation from approximately 10 additional companies
that they would join the CHEMNET system. Therefore, we will be beginning
the CHEMNET operations with almost 50 members.
We have also tentatively selected four emergency response contractors
to act as the "for-hire" contractors in the CHEMNET system. These
contractors have teams at locations throughout the United States and can
reach most areas within 3 to 4 hours of notification, we hope to sign
contracts with all four firms.
While 50 members and four contractors represent enough emergency
response capability to start up the CHEMNET system, we must redouble our
efforts to enroll more chemical companies into the system or the public
will misunderstand and be disappointed by the coverage of the CHEMNET
program. A campaign to enlist more companies has begun.
Chemical Referral Center. The Chemical Referral Center <CRC), which
will become operational by the end of 1985, is designed to provide those
that desire health and safety information about a particular chemical with
a company contact that can furnish such information. The Distribution
Committee has established a work group to oversee the operation of the
Chemical Referral Center. Thus far, 93 CMA member companies have signed
on to the program. Information pertaining to the chemicals and products
they produce are being submitted to CMA. This information will be the
foundation of a computerized chemical index that CMA operators will
use to link products with manufacturers as a public service.
Lending Library. The training programs for emergency services
personnel have been purchased for the lending library. A brochure
listing the programs and how to obtain them is now available, and
distribution to fire service organizations and members has begun.
First Responder Videotape Training Program. The script for the
videotape training program has been approved and filming was started T'~~
week of August 19 at the Fairfax County Fire Training facility.
Page
24
CMA 038349
Emergency Response Terms, The final draft of the booklet on
"Recommended Terms for Personnel Protective Clothing" was approved
and should be available for distribution by the end of October. This
document defines and illustrates terms used to communicate to the emergency
responder the different types of personal protective equipment. The
purpose of the document is to ensure clear and consistent communication
between those who offer advice and those who respond.
Technical and Research Activities
Motor Carrier Safety Survey. Reception of this program by the
shipping community and the carrier industry has been very favorable.
Recently the Military Traffic Command expressed a strong interest in
adopting the program for all defense shipments. A comparison of the
accident frequency ratios of the surveyed motor carriers against all other
motor carriers will be undertaken to determine whether the safety records
are actually better than the national average.
Communications
Following a rash of incidents in transporting chemicals, CMA
spokesmen have responded to media questions with statistics on safety and
explanations of CHEMTREC.
Appearances on two national television programs on CBS and CNN were
organized.
Energy and Petrochemical Feedstocks
Congressional Developments and Response
Natural Gas
The debate over natural gas issues is primarily concentrated in the
regulatory arena where the Federal Energy Regulatory Conmission (FERC)
rulemaking process has intensified. FERC activity, particularly a
proposal dealing with the transportation or carriage of gas, is under
close Congressional scrutiny.
An amendment adopted by the Senate Appropriations Committee would
prohibit FERC from putting into effect any rule dealing with gas
transportation issues pending Congressional review between enactment of
the energy and water appropriation bill and the end of the first session
of the 99th Congress. Senator J. Bennett Johnston (D—LA) withdrew his
amendment on the Senate floor after assurances made by the FERC chairman.
Opponents of the appropriation amendment believe that FERC is proceeding
under ongoing legislative authority and that limiting the scope of FERC
action is an unwarranted intrusion in the independent regulatory process.
The FERC will probably be allowed to conduct transportation programs while
Congress Is reviewing FERC's rulemaking. House energy leaders opposed the
appropriations amendment, however, the House Fossil and Synthetic Fuels
Subcommittee submitted several substantive questions to FERC regarding the
rulemaking process.
rag
25
CMA 038350
Legislation unlikely to move quickly is pending in both the Senate
and House. A bill introduced by Senator Don Nickles (R-OK) would repeal
incremental pricing and fuel use restraints and decontrol the price of all
gas under renegotiated or expiring gas purchase contracts. Senate
oversight hearings on the status of the natural gas industry have been
held in the Subcotmnittee on Energy Regulation and Conservation. A bill
offered by Senator Bill Bradley (D-NJ) would require mandatory contract
carriage by pipeline companies.
It is expected that House Energy and Commerce Cononittee Chairman John
Dingell (D-MI-16) and Fossil and Synthetic Fuels Subcommittee Chairman
Philip R. Sharp (D-IN-2) will hold oversight hearings on natural gas
issues, including matters presently before the FERC. Repeal of gas
incremental pricing provisions of the Natural Gas Policy Act (NGPA) and
Fuel Use Act (FUA) restrictions are the focus of most attention in the
House. Representative Jim Slattery (D-KS-22) and Dan Coates (R-IN-4) havr>
introduced a bill that just repeal the natural gas demand restraints under
the FUA and NGPA. Representative Bill Richardson (D-MM-3) and William E.
Dannemeyer (R-CA-39) have proposed a more comprehensive measure that would
repeal demand restraints, further deregulate and require contract
carriage.
CMA continues to monitor legislative proposals and file comments and
present testimony before FERC. CMA has requested that FERC act
expeditiously on issuing a rule on nondiscriminatory transportation.
Oil Import Fee
A Congressional attempt was made before the August recess to propose
an oil import fee as part of the Federal budget deficit reduction package.
President Reagan flatly rejected the proposal, consistent with his stated
desire not to increase taxes to reduce budget deficits. However, a
continuing willingness has been demonstrated by key Senate leaders to
consider some form of taxation on energy as a means to generate revenue.
Senate budget conferees offered a proposal that would impose a $5 per
barrel levy on imported crude oil and a $10 per barrel fee on imports of
refined petroleum products. The proposal was endorsed by Senate Majority
Leader Robert J. Dole (R-KS), Senate Budget Committee Chairman Pete V.
Domenici (R-NM), and Finance Committee Chairman Senator Bob Packwood
(R-OR). Some Administration opposition to an oil import fee has been
qualified and the negotiations over budget matters may revive interest in
additional taxes on energy. Proposals that may be considered during
budget deliberations include a broad-based consumption sales tax on
energy, a BTU tax, a value added approach, an increased gasoline excise
tax, crude oil excise taxes and oil import fees. A current market surplus
of petroleum coupled with the OPEC price decline is also influencing the
views of many in Congress.
Legislation that would impose a $10 per barrel fee on imported oil
and refined petroleum products has been introduced by Representative James
H. Weaver (D-OR-4) and Senator Gary Hart (D-CO). Senators David Boren
(D-OK) and Lloyd Bent'sen (D-TX) are also sponsoring legislation that would
26
CMA 038351
levy a tax on imported oil and oil products. A bill has also been offered
by Representative Anthony C. Beilenson (D-CA-23) that would phase in a SO
cent a gallon excise tax on gasoline. Senator Lowell P. Weicker (R-CT)
has offered a proposal that would phase in a 30 cent increase in the
gasoline excise tax. No immediate action is expected on the bills
introduced.
The economic impact of various energy taxes on the chemical industry
continues to be monitored and reviewed at CMA. Key Administration
officials have been contacted concerning the impact of energy taxes on the
chemical industry. CMA advocacy and liaison with other industry groups is
oriented in opposition to the imposition of new or additional energy
taxes. A broad coalition has sent a letter to President Reagan
reiterating opposition to any additional tax on energy.
Regulatory Developments and Response
Rulemaking on Transportation of Natural Gas. On May 30, 1985, the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission proposed a major rule with respect to
the regulation of natural gas. The purpose of the rule is to require
non-discrimination in blanket transportation programs and to encourage
competition in natural gas markets.
CMA joined a broad coalition of industrial users in submitting
comments on the proposed rule. These coments expressed support for the
major policy directions and many of the details of the Connission's
proposals. The comments, however, also urged several important
modifications. In particular, the Connission should not adopt the Part D
approach for separate billing of low- and high-priced gas.
In addition to written comments, CMA testified before the Commission
on August 2. The testimony strongly supported the Commission's efforts to
facilitate equal access to outer continental shelf gas and urged further
actions in this regard. The testimony also criticized the Commission for
failing to address the substantial regulatory obstacle created by
incremental pricing. CMA urged the Comaission to suspend the operation of
the incremental pricing program for a definite period of time. Finally,
CMA asked the Connission to withdraw Part D of the proposed rule.
Eliminating traditional rolled-in pricing in favor of allocating and
billing "old" gas separately from all other gas would create serious
distortions in the natural gas market.
Taxation
Congress
Hearings on tax reform continued to be the principal issue in July
for both the House Committee on Ways and Means and the Senate Committee on
Finance. Although the cost of each of these provisions may vary from
company to company, their combined impact to the chemical industry will
exceed $2.5 billion annually. On July 30, Dexter F. Baker, Chief
Executive Officer, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., testified on behalf
of the Association before the Committee on Ways and Means. In his
Page
27
CMA 038352
testimony, which was followed by a 45-minute colloquy with several members
of the Committee, Mr. Baker demonstrated a very credible knowledge of
related tax and trade issues.
CMA* s position on tax reform legislation may be briefly summarized in
these key points:
o Support of comprehensive tax reform and President Reagan's
goals of economic growth, fairness and simplicity.
However, the Administration's May 28, 1985 tax proposals
fail to meet these goals.
o The proposed shift of current individual tax burdens to
corporations, and more specifically to capital-intensive
corporations, will seriously damage the economy and the
prospects for sustained growth.
o In order to keep U.S. products competitive in domestic and
world markets, O.S. manufacturers need capital cost
recovery provisions comparable to those our foreign
competitors enjoy. Thus, Congress should maintain the
investment tax credit and Accelerated Cost Recovery System
(ACRS) and should reject the recapture tax on the so-called
"windfall" from accelerated depreciation.
o The limit on foreign tax
determined on an overall
country-by-country limit
for foreign assets would
of double taxation.
credits should continue to be
basis. The proposed change to a
and the 17-year depreciable life
substantially increase the threat
o The "title passage" test should remain the basis for
determining the source of income for exports and similar
sales. In addition. Congress should reject the proposed
change in the allocation of interest expenses.
o The 25-percent tax credit for research and experimentation
should be extended as proposed by the President, and the
moratorium on allocation of research and development
expenses under Regulations 1.861-8 should be made
permanent.
The House Senate compromise on a Joint Congressional Resolution on
the Budget for Fiscal 1986 has cooled a threat that an oil import fee or
tax increase proposal would be adopted to gain control over mounting
Federal deficits. President Reagan's efforts to secure a compromise on
the Congresssional budget resolution have undercut support for his tax
reform plan among Senate Republicans, many of whom contend that the
President sacrificed a tough Senate budget stance without first obtaining
offsetting savings from the House Conferees.
Senate and House leaders have attacked both the fairness and the
revenue neutrality of the Administration's tax proposal. Senate Finance
Committee Chairman Bob Packwood (R-OR) ha£ argued that the proposal's
Page
28
CMA 038353
provisions to repeal the deduction of State and local taxes and the
special deduction for married couples in which there are two wage earners
would increase taxes for many middle-income taxpayers. Citing the revenue
estimates by the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, House Ways and
Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D-IL) called upon the Administration to
identify where additional revenues could be raised to maintain the
promised revenue neutrality of the overall program. Both challenges would
appear to have had a major impact on the Congressional tax reform debate.
Under these circumstances, Congress could have greater latitude "to
pick-and choose" from the President's tax program in fashioning a
Congressional vehicle.
Anticipating that the Ways and Means Committee could begin the
selection of the specific components of a tax reform bill as early as
September, CMA is developing its plan for further early action on this
important legislation.
The Washington business community is divided on the merits of the
president's tax proposal. As the elements of a Congressional tax
alternative become more definite, the opportunities for greater business
unity will increase significantly. CMA continues to coordinate its
efforts on tax legislation with allied business and trade groups.
plant Management and Design
Technical and Research Activiti-' ~
1987 National Electrical Code. This code is mandatory for a large
number of cities, counties and states and it has a significant cost and
safety impact on CMA members. The Electrical Codes and Standards Task
Group will prepare CMA comments at its September 24 and 25 meeting and
member companies are also encouraged to submit comnents. Historically,
CMA participation in this activity has resulted in improved safety and
$100 million per year cost savings for members.
National Electrical Manufacturers Association Liaison. CMA reviewed
the NEMA Standard Procedure for Evaluating Ground Fault Circuit
Interrupters for Response to Conducted Radio Frequency Energy. CMA
recommended that the procedure should be developed to guarantee that
ground fault circuit interrupters will not be susceptible to conducted or
radiated radio frequency energy.
UL 486E. CMA reviewed the UL Standard for Safety Equipment Wiring
Terminals for Use with Aluminum and/or Copper Conductors. CMA objected to
a proposal that this standard be recognized as an American National
Standard because, in our view, the test procedure should be further
developed to provide for testing these terminals under actual field
conditions.
age
29
CMA 038354
Patents and Protection of Technology
Congress
Process Patent Legislation. Process patent legislation has been
introduced in both the House (H.R. 1069, introduced on February 7, 1985,
by Congressman Carlos Moorehead (R-CA)) and Senate (s. 1543, introduced
on July 31, 1985, by Senators Mathias (R-MD) and Lautenberg (D-NJ)). CMA
has endorsed neither bill. However, CMA has supported generally the need
for enactment of legislation which would give the owner of a process
patented in the United States the right to bring a suit for patent
infringement against a party who imports a product that is manufactured
abroad by using the process.
State Legislative and Regulatory Activity
Superfund
Missouri. Missouri's method of paying for hazardous waste cleanups
will change in 1987 under a law signed by Governor John Ashcroft. The
hazardous waste cleanup program currently is funded with an employee tax
imposed on each hazardous waste generator. Under the new statute, the
"head tax" will be replaced by a waste volume tax effective
January 1, 1987, or earlier if receipts to the remedial fund fall below
$1.5 million annually. Hazardous waste which is landfilled or stored'will
be taxed at twice the rate for treated or recycled waste. Missouri's
Hazardous Waste Management Commission is directed by the new law to set
the tax rates to generate approximately $1.5 million from the fees. In
addition, the statute requires the director of the state Department of
Natural Resources to request general revenues or federal funds equal to at
least one-third the amount levied against generators.
Vermont. A tax on hazardous waste generated in Vermont took effect
July 1 to finance a state fund to clean up hazardous waste sites. In
addition to creating a state Superfund, the law subjects industries to
strict, joint and several liability for cleanup costs. Under the law, the
state does not have to prove negligence in order to hold a party liable
for cleanup costs. Those responsible for disposal or contamination of any
part of a particular site can be held liable for the entire cleanup cost.
The Superfund will be used for remedial action, investigations, removal of
waste, spill control and reimbursement of expenses by local governments
and others.
Texas. A comprehensive program to regulate the disposal of hazardous
waste and charge fees for the generation and disposal of hazardous waste
was signed into law in Texas. Industry succeeded in securing several
provisions such as changes to the permitting process. An applicant now
only needs one permit for storage, processing, treatment, disposal or
destruction of solid or hazardous waste. Another provision prevents local
governments from adopting a rule or ordinance that is inconsistent with
the state law.
"age
30
CMA 038355
As a result of the legislation, two funds are created in the state
treasury - the Hazardous Waste Generation and Facility Fee Fund and the
Hazardous Waste Disposal Fee Fund. Facility fees are to be set at
$250-520,000 per year, the generation and facility fund is not to exceed
$35 million a year.
The Hazardous Waste Disposal Fee Fund imposes a $4
per dry weight ton fee on hazardous waste disposal at a land disposal
facility. The bill, however, places a S10 million cap on the fund at the
end of a quarter. Funds collected from the disposal fee are to be
appropriated for the state/federal match for CERCLA and for state-only
cleanup activities.
public Compensation
Minnesota. Amendments to the state's Superfund statute were recently
enacted including a $2 million victims compensation fund. Among the bills
key provisions were:
o Repeal of the causation clause which required a defendant
in a toxic tort case to prove that it did not cause the
injury.
o A change in the retroactivity provision for personal
liability from January 1, 1960 to July 1, 1983, the date
the Minnesota Superfund law went into effect.
o Repeal of the joint and several liability provision.
Conferees, however, deleted a provision that would have
limited the number of times a party could be found joint
and severally liable.
The victims compensation fund, authorized at $2 million, will be
financed through general revenues, although the state can seek repayment
from responsible parties, if known. Victims can recover up to $250,000.
Claims can be submitted for unreimbursed medical expenses, loss of wages
or loss of household labor. The law also provides that survivors can
receive up to $24,000 a year or $2,000 a month. Additionally, persons
with contaminated water can recover up to $25,000 for cither a new water
supply or for decontasiinating existing water resources. If there is a
decrease in the market value of a principal residence due to
contamination, a person can recover up to 75 percent of the loss or
$25,000, whichever is less.
In order to achieve the favorable changes in the existing liability
provisions, industry in Minnesota agreed to the compensation fund and
strongly supported the bill.
Other States. Amendments to California’s 1981 victim compensation
law were also enacted recently. These changes moderately expanded the
program but did not provide significantly more exposure to the industry.
Activity is still underway in Massachusetts where a bill may be considered
in the next six months.
Hazardous Waste
Page
31
CMA 038356
Michigan. In an effort to discourage the use of landfills, while
promoting alternatives. Governor James Blanchard recently proposed the
imposition of a $10 per ton fee for hazardous waste disposed in landfills
beginning in 1985. The fee, which could be reduced by 50 percent if the
waste is treated, would generate an estimated $2 million in state revenue
which would be applied to additional permit staff and enforcement. The
proposal would also establish a notification, education and inspection
program to assist with the disposal for smaller quantities of waste.
California. A report by the state's Commission for Economic
Development, chaired by Lt. Governor McCarthy, estimates that it will
cost California $4 billion per year for managing hazardous waste. The
commission's report proposed "the 1990 plan" for improving the management
of toxic chemicals in California and minimizing long term costs. Key
elements include reducing the volume of waste sent to dumpsites and
developing new technology for treating waste. Additional short term
measures recommended by the coimnission include assurance that adequate
liability insurance is available for businesses that produce or dispose of
hazardous waste, tougher drinking water standards for the 30 most
widespread toxic contaminants and increased support for technologies that
reduce toxic chemicals in drinking water.
The commission said it will sponsor or recommend legislation to
accomplish the plan's objectives. One proposal would allow the Department
of Health Services to waive state imposed fees on.land disposal of
hazardous waste, up to $60 per ton, for any company that substantially
reduces the volume of hazardous waste disposed of in dumps. Another
proposal would create a state certification process for hazardous waste
management technologies that are considered economically effective and
environmentally safe.
South Carolina. Governor Richard Riley recently signed legislation
that increased the state's contingency fund and placed a fixed limit on
the amount to hazardous waste disposed of in the state. The legislation
more than doubles the fee per ton of hazardous waste disposed of by
landfilling or other means of land disposal, raising the tax from $5/ton
of wastes generated in state to $13/ton. For out-of-state waste received
at a facility, the tax increases from $7.50/ton to $18.
Iowa. Although Iowa was one of the first states to receive interim
authorization over its hazardous waste program, the state has now become
the first to voluntarily withdraw this authority with the program
reverting back to EPA. Due to severe financial shortfalls in the state,
the Legislature approved an appropriations measure that deletes funding of
the hazardous waste program for two years. Because of this legislation,
EPA found the state lacking authority to administer the program after
July 1, and suspended Iowa's authority to issue RCRA permits. Iowa will
retain authority over the state's abandoned and uncontrolled sites, used
oil, site licensing and collection of hazardous waste fees.
Right-to-Know
State Legislation. The issues of chemical hazard information
disclosure in the workplace and the community and local emergency response
Page
32
CMA 038367
planning, have had a very high profile during the 1985 state legislative
sessions. Through the end of July, over 150 right-to-know bills have been
introduced in over 35 states.
Since most legislatures have adjourned for the year or are in summer
recess, it is possible to begin to summarize activity in this area. To
data, 22 states have passed some form of a right-to-know law this year.
Ten of the new laws establish comprehensive worker, community and/or
emergency response programs. These laws were enacted in: Alabama,
Louisiana, Missouri, Montana, North Carolina, Oregon, Tennessee, Texas,
Vermont and West Virginia.
Five states have passed laws which add community right-to-know or
emergency response requirements to worker right-to-know programs enacted
in previous years. These are: Florida, Illinois, Maine, Maryland and
Washington. Seven additional states have passed laws which make minor
changes to existing right-to-know programs. Several states meet in
year-round sessions. Of these. New Jersey is debating community
right-to-know legislation, California is considering re-authorization of
its existing program and Michigan is considering a comprehensive law.
Session Review. The task group is beginning to assess the 1985 state
legislative session by reviewing the right-to-know legislation that has
been enacted. Preliminary indications are that the new comprehensive laws
passed in 10 states are generally consistent with CMA policy on worker and
community right-to-know. Most of the laws are based on the Federal OSHA
Standard as they apply to manufacturers, and contain community and
emergency response requirements which could blend with CMA's CAER
initiatives. The task group is developing advocacy documents to be used
in the states which incorporate CMA's policy in this area. An update of
the right-to-know state law compilation is also being prepared which will
include all new legislation passed in 1985.
State Litigation. Court actions are pending in two states, as
industry begins to force states to recognize the Federal OSHA Standard
preemption over state law, as it applies to manufacturers. Oral arguments
were heard on June 18 in the appeal of the New Jersey decision upholding
federal preemption, (New Jersey State Chamber of Commerce et al v.
Hughey). In Pennsylvania a group of regional manufacturing associations
filed suit on July 19, asking the U.S. District Court to grant an
injunction against the State Department of Labor and Industry, prohibiting
the further implementation and future enforcement of that state's worker
and community right-to-know law. No action has occurred on this suit as
yet.
Groundwater
Ohio. The governor recently released a report which defines the
administration's goals and objectives for environmental protection and
natural resource development. High on the governor's priority list is the
cleanup of contaminated ground and surface water to protect the safety of
public and private drinking water. It is anticipated that this initiative
will be addressed in a bill to be introduced in the General Assembly later
Page
33
CMA 038358
this year- Separate legislation will be introduced that will focus solely
on the protection of groundwater.
New Jersey. The New Jersey Senate Energy and Environment Committee
has passed a bill which allows homeowners to petition the state to provide
alternative water supplies when wells are contaminated. Under the
legislation, a homeowner could also petition the Department of
Environmental Protection to test a well for potential contaminants. Funds
for replacing contaminated systems would come from the New Jersey Spill
Compensation Fund and a $10 million appropriation from general revenues.
The New Jersey Chemical Industry Council testified on the bill cautioning
that Spill Fund monies should not be used for unnecessary well testing.
Amendments to the bill from the DEP are expected.
Other Activities. Members of the Hazardous Waste/ Groundwater Task
Group recently participated in the National Conference of State
Legislatures annual meeting. CMA's position papers on groundwater
standards and groundwater monitoring were highlighted during a session on
leaking underground storage tank discussions. In addition, task group
members and CMA staff participated in discussions with the Association of
Washington Business on upcoming testimony on proposed drinking water
standards.
Transportation
New York. A legislative package regulating the transportation of
hazardous materials in New York failed to gain passage. The Legislature,
however, approved and sent to the governor a bill to establish a board
composed of private and public sector representatives to review certain
aspects of the hazardous materials transportation issue. The board would
make recommendations to the Legislature and the governor within a year.
Two cities — Denver, Colorado and Columbus, Ohio — have passed
ordinances controlling the shipment of hazardous cargos, through their
confines. Denver's City Council passed an ordinance which designates
routes for class A or B explosives, some poison materials, organic
peroxides and radioactive materials. Permits, as of July 1, are now
required for trucks carrying hazardous materials through the city. The
cost of the permits will be determined by degree of risk, quantities being
transported as well as additional factors. Applicants must designate a
specified route for their trip and show proof of liability coverage to get
the permits which will last for a year.
Columbus, Ohio has implemented an ordinance which requires through
shipments of hazardous materials to use a bypass around the city and
specifies hours of delivery and permits for deliveries of hazardous
shipments in the downtown area.
The city anticipates that there will be limited requests for such
permits but the permit mechanism will result in better emergency
preparedness since emergency personnel can be better informed of specific
shipments of hazardous materials in heavily populated areas.
Hazardous Materials Transportation.
Members of the task group are
"age
34
CMA 038359
continuing to work with members of the Good Samaritan Coalition to promote
the passage of good Samaritan legislation in the states,
in addition,
members of the group are working with individual state legislators in New
Jersey, North Carolina and Georgia to expand existing legislation to cover
all hazardous materials, not just LP gas.
Toxic Air
State Legislatures. The two issues receiving the most scrutiny at
the state level in 1985 are acid rain and toxic air contaminants.
Legislation to require an inventory of nitrogen oxide emissions and their
effect on the environment was enacted in Maine. Other states which have
passed resolutions to study the acid rain issue are Minnesota, Virginia,
Washington, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and New York.
Laws which require programs to regulate air toxics were passed in
Arizona and Rhode Island, and in California, a law was enacted which would
tax air toxics emissions in order to pay for state regulatory programs.
Hazardous air emission inventories have also been a part of the
right-to-know debate at both the state and federal level. A comprehensive
right-to-know law, recently enacted in West Virginia, includes provisions
which require certain manufactures to consolidate all federal, state and
local air emissions permits and provide them to the state. In Florida,
legislation was passed which requires air emissions inventories, and in
Illinois, a bill to inventory emissions of 85 chemicals was narrowly
defeated in the closing days of the session.
State Regulation. Programs to regulate toxic air contaminants are
being developed and implemented in nearly 40 states. Connecticut
continues to work on its final draft plan, and Vermont has recently
released its plan to regulate hazardous air contaminants. Industry
groups are closely monitoring these activities.
Strategy Development. In conjunction with the Environmental
Management Committee's focus on a CMA air toxics work plan, the State
Affairs Toxic Air Task Group is preparing strategies to work the issue in
the states. A system is being established to closely monitor the
legislative and regulatory activities in specific high-priority states and
the task group is being expanded to include member companies with
activities in these states. Comnunication programs will be developed
which can be used to advocate CMA policies at the state level through
member companies and chemical industry councils. The task group is also
working with various technical task groups to integrate state legislative
and regulatory perspectives into CMA's toxic air pollutant program.
Specific Chemical Research and Advocacy
Advocacy Highlights
Allyl Chloride. The Program Panel decided to disband after 10 years
of activities. The Panel undertook toxicologic research projects to
evaluate toxicity potential and submitted research reports to government
35
CMA 038360
agencies. Regulation by EPA is possible under the Clean Air Act; however,
because of low toxicity and exposure potentials, the Agency has placed
allyl chloride at a very low priority. The Panel may reconvene when the
Agency initiates activities on the chemical.
Dibenzofurans/Dibenzodioxins. The DF/DX Panel submitted comments to
EPA on plans for a TSCA Section 4 monitoring test rule. While the Panel
informed EPA that it questions the Agency's authority to require
manufacturers to analyze products for trace contaminants, they indicated a
willingness to cooperate to develop a reasonable test rule. The Panel
advocated the need for an analytical round robin to demonstrate reasonable
analytical parameters for a test rule. The Panel's Analytical Task Group
then met with EPA technical staff to discuss the comments. The proposed
rule is scheduled to be published by EPA in November 1985.
Dow Chemical Company hosted an educational seminar for the DF/DX
Panel and Task Group members in Midland, Michigan. Various
representatives from Dow Chemical Company and Monsanto Company
presented the latest information on the health and environmental effects,
and the fate and environmental sources of dioxins and furans. Tours of
Dow's Analytical and Toxicology laboratories were also arranged for the
attendees. The seminar was extremely successful and provided the Panel
with a technical base from which to develop its comments on various EPA
proceedings.
Ethylhexanoic Acid. The EHA Panel submitted comments on the proposed
test rule on ethylhexanoic acid. The rule proposed subchronic,
developmental and pharmacokinetics testing based upon concern that dermal
exposure might occur during processing. EHA is used solely as an
intermediate in the synthesis of other chemicals and is manufactured and
consumed entirely in enclosed systems.
The Panel contented that exposure to EHA is so limited that there is
no likelihood that EHA could pose a significant risk to workers,
regardless of the outcome of the proposed testing. To obtain additional
information on potential exposure, the Panel is sponsoring a survey of
users.
The Panel also consented on the rationale for requiring testing,
stating that the subchronic and developmental testing is unjustified and
the pharmacokinetics testing is needed only if effects are found in other
tests. Finally, the Panel recommends streamlining the proposed
pharmacokinetics testing to provide data in a more timely and costefficient fashion.
Fluorocarbons. In June, the companies supporting the Fluorocarbon
Program approved a $1,815 million budget for calendar year 1986.
This is a 3.5% increase over the 1985 budget.
Also in June, the Panel released Revision 21 of its "SUMMARY:
Research Program on Effect of Chlorofluorocarbons on the Atmosphere." This
annual publication details all research funded by the Panel in its
thirteen-year history.
"age
36
CMA 038361
l
In August, the Panel submitted comments to EPA on four draft
documents prepared as part of the Environmental Impact Statement on the
effect of control measures for the protection of the ozone layer. EPA and
the Department of state are conducting the EIS as background to the U.S.
position on activities under the UNEP Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer. In addition, a UNEP resolution, calling for further study to
address both short- and long-term strategies, is being implemented. A
UNEP Steering Committee meeting is planned for September 17-18, 1985, in
London, to organize workshops to be held within the next year.
Glycol Ethers. A Work Group of the Glycol Ethers Panel met with EPA
staff to address remaining technical concerns with industry data submitted
in response to a TSCA Section 4 ANPR on diethylene glycol butyl ether and
its acetate. EPA plans to announce its decision on testing needs in the
fall, and a Federal Register notice is expected in spring 1986.
The National Toxicology Program has three glycol ethers and their
respective acetates under review as candidate chemicals for testing in the
Program. The Panel is maintaining a close liaison with NTP and will
attempt to establish a CMA/NTP Work Group if the chemicals are recommended
for testing by the NTP Executive Committee.
Three triethylene glycol ethers appeared on the 16th interagency
Testing Committee list of priority chemicals recommended for testing under
TSCA Section 4(a). Panel members attended the EPA Public Focus Meeting
and presently are involved in information-gathering. It is possible that
the Panel will sponsor dermal absorption studies on these compounds in
advance of an EPA test rule proposal.
I
Ketones. The Ketones Panel members met with EPA scientists in June
to discuss differences in interpretation of the mutagenicity test data on
MEK and MI8K gathered as part of a negotiated testing agreement. The
Panel considers the ten mutagenicity tests to indicate no need for further
testing on the two compounds. Extensive comments backing the Panel's
position were filed with the Agency. The EPA will respond by the end of
this year.
Methylenedianiline. The MDA Panel submitted comments on OSHA's draft
Federal Register notice announcing the Agency's plans to form a negotiated
Rulemaking Consoittee on MDA. OSHA intends to establish a committee under
the Federal Advisory Committee Act to negotiate issues leading to a
proposed rulemaking on MDA. The committee is to include representatives
of the parties interested in or affected by the outcome of the rulemaking.
Naphthenates. The Naphthenates Panel completed the first phase of •
its dermal absorption study on lead and cobalt naphthenates. The results
have been submitted to EPA under a 1984 agreement with the Agency. The
Panel and EPA will discuss the need for additional testing in the near
future.
Octylphenol. The Panel is reviewing EPA's comnents on a protocol for
an aquatic chronic effects study of octylphenol in rainbow trout. The
Panel intends to start testing within the next several weeks.
'age
37
CMA 038362
Oleylamine. The Panel recently completed a mutagenicity test on
oleylamine and found the chemical to be devoid of mutagenic potential in
this test system. The report of the Panel-sponsored research was
submitted to relevant agencies.
Phosgene. Representatives of the Phosgene Panel's Engineering and
Safety Practices Task Group met with the Department of Energy and their
contractor, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, to discuss conducting an air
dispersion study of phosgene. The Panel is interested in using the DOE's
new Liquefied Gaseous Fuels Spill Test Facility to evaluate various
mitigation devices for accidental phosgene releases and to assess
different air dispersion models currently available. The facility is
being constructed at the DOE Nevada Test Site.
Phthalate Esters. On behalf of the Phthalate Esters Panel, Dr.
Joseph Rodricks, of Environ Corporation, Mr. Derek Till of Arthur D.
Little, Inc., and Dr. Bernard Astill of Eastman Kodak Company made
presentations to the Chronic Hazard Advisory Panel of the Consumer Product
Safety Commission. The scientists addressed three key issues concerning
the health effects of DEHP — toxicology, exposure, and risk assessment.
Dr. Rodricks, a leading expert in risk assessment, concluded that the
individual lifetime risk associated with DEHP-containing children's
products is probably less than one in one hundred million. According to
Mr. Till, ADL concluded that while the CPSC exposure study is a useful
contribution to the literature, it is inadequate to form the basis for an
exposure assessment. Dr. Astill emphasized that there is overwhelming
evidence that DEHP is not a genotoxic material.
Subsequently, the CHAP completed its draft report on DEHP and
released it for public comment. The report concludes that DEHP is a
non-genotoxic carcinogen with induction of peroxisomes as its probable
mechanism of action. This mechanism, while not proven, would result in a
threshold of exposure to DEHP below which there is no risk. The CHAP
recommended that research on mechanism of action and exposure continue.
The Phthalate Esters Panel decided not to proceed with the second
phase of its environmental effects testing program, which was part of the
1982 negotiated testing agreement with EPA. The Panel decision resulted
from a meeting with the EPA Test Rules Development Branch (TRDB) in May.
TRDB said that it did not intend to review the Panel's Phase I proposal
before fall 1985. Furthermore, the Agency revealed an intention to
publish a proposed test rule on butyl benzyl phthalate in October. The
proposed rule will prescribe substantially more testing than was agreed to
in the negotiated testing agreement. The additional testing would include
all studies that are required to establish a Water Quality Standard on
BBP.
In a letter to EPA Assistant Administrator Dr. John Moore, the Panel
stated that it is concerned that EPA might adopt a similar approach on
other PEs. Efforts to perform further environmental testing are
therefore suspended until the situation is clarified.
Titanium Dioxide. The National Cancer Institute has begun a
feasibility epidemiology study of titanium^dioxide workers. Industry is
Page
38
CMA 038363
cooperating fully in this study to provide NCI with necessary information
to make a decision on whether to undertake a full epidemiology
study- NCI's decision is expected in March, 1986.
rrr—mity Awareness and Emergency Response (CAER)
Program Activiti'~
CMA has sponsored seven CAER Workshops. The workshops were held in
San Francisco, CA; Houston, TX; New Orleans, LA; Chicago, IL; Newark, NJ;
Atlanta GA; and St. Louis, MO. Over 1500 CAER coordinators and plant
managers attended these workshops. In addition, CMA provided industry
briefing teams to, and cosponsored regional CAER workshops with, the West
Virginia Manufacturers Association and the Michigan Chemical Industry
Council.
Over 164 member and nonmember companies have assigned CAER
coordinators. During August, CMA will ask the CAER coordinators to
identify the number of sites participating in the program and the number
that have achieved the first CAER milestone. The target date for the
first milestone was July 1985. To achieve the first milestone, plant
managers will have reviewed the CAER handbook, attended a CAER workshop,
and initiated discussions with local officials to set up coordinating
groups.
To assist CAER coordinators and plant managers in their community
outreach efforts, CMA has prepared a videotape, 35mm slide presentation
and CAER brochure. The Communications Department is making these
materials available to the industry.
CMA is coordinating CAER's implementation with federal agencies. The
response is supportive. In fact, CMA presented the CAER and NCRIC
programs at a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) teleconference on
June 25. The teleconference was broadcast to over 60,000 state and
local emergency response officials, industry representatives and elected
officials.
Communications
Significant staff attention is being devoted to support of the
community awareness and emergency response program.
o A special community awareness section of the CAER workbook
was written by a staff/member team to round out instruction
materials.
o Over 6,000 copies of the CAER workbook have been
distributed.
o Two hundred sets of a communication package including video
tape, brochures and a slide presentation have been sold.
^age
39
CMA 038364
o September 17 an open communications committee meeting will
focus on the communications role in community awareness.
Presentations will be made by small, medium, and large
companies.
o The Communications Committee has recruited a pool of
communication consultants from member companies who will
offer assistance to members without communications staff.
o A CAER newsletter to exchange information about how
companies are implementing the program is being
distributed.
o A special regional communications grant has been made to
the New Jersey Chemical Industry Council to develop a model
community awareness program.
III.
DEPARTMENTAL PROGRAM NOTES
Office off the President
International AffairTraining in Developing Countries. The World Environment Center
(WEC), under financial support from the U.S. Agency for International
Development (AID), has recently completed the first of a number of country
visits aimed at improving the health, environment, and safety of people in
industrial facilities. The unit which WEC sent to Tunisia included a
representative from The Dow Chemical Company and one from Tenneco, Inc.
The team submitted a list of corrective actions which would greatly
improve the environmental safety and health standards of the plants they
visited. A second group, which will include a representative from
Occidental Chemical Corporation, is scheduled to go to India later in the
month. That will be followed by visits to Jordan and other developing
middle eastern nations that have requested assistance.
Additionally, AID has indicated willingness to pay for translation of
the CAER Handbook into Arabic and French. WEC people and AID officials
are extremely complimentary about the CAER Handbook and are anxious to
begin the translation.
Association Liaison
The Council of Chemical Associations met on July 17 and discussed
Superfund, right-to-know, CAER, toxic air, state legislative initiatives
and other issues. The next meeting is scheduled for September 18.
Member Services
Plans are actively underway for the Fifth Annual Meeting of State
Chemical Organizations. The meeting will be held October 22-24 at the
-age
40
CMA 038366
o FEMA is discussing mandatory emergency response
preparedness programs for areas surrounding chemical
plants.
o EPA, OSHA, and FEMA are discussing the need for national
strategies and mandatory standards to manage hazardous
substances -- too often they allude to programs that
parallel those regulating the nuclear industry.
Press, Agency, Professional Association, and Congressional
spokespersons are casting a dangerous illusion that our 200 year old
chemical industry is decaying and that it is just beginning to spring
leaks. This illusion strikes at the heart of our industry's image as a
progressive, high technology, modem industry leading the way into the
21st century.
Office of General Counsel
Conference on Insurance and the Chemical Industry. On August 28,
1985, a conference was held for CMA members on INSURANCE AND THE CHEMICAL
INDUSTRY; PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS. Organized by the Office of General
Counsel, the conference was held to explore problems of insurance
unavailability and possible solutions.
Among the topics discussed included: the availability of insurance
today; developments in the liability arena; congressional and EPA
perspectives on insurance issues; and customized solutions, pools,
captives and other arrangements.
Communications
CMA Annual Report. The 1984-1985 report has been completed and is in
distribution. As has been practice for the past two years the report
presents a retrospective and prospective view of major industry issues.
Communications Support for State Legislative and Regulatory Activity
o A new manual on linking advocacy communication techniques
to state legislative activity has been prepared and
distributed to each CIC.
o An $8,000 seed grant has been made to the California CIC to
carry out a project targeted at thought leaders in Contra
Costa County.
Page
42
CMA 038367
SXHI3IT H
Report
International
to the Board
September
of the
Affairs Group
of Directors
10, 1985
By
Thomas W. Mooney, Vice Chairman
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
the last fiscal year brought a series of remarkable achievements for the IAG.
;n addition to the September 1984 meetings with the Japan Chemical Industry
Association in Tokyo and the Australian Chemical Industry Council in Canberra,
Australia, the IAG met formally for the first time with members of the Canadian
chemical Producers Association in Toronto in May 1985. During this same time
period, discussions were initiated with the European Council of Chemical
Manufacturers' Federations (CEFIC) to establish an international working party
of experts under the auspices of the Safety of Chemicals Committee of CEFIC and
the International Affairs Group of CMA/SOCMA, along with the Canadian Chemical
Producers Association, to establish scientific criteria for identifying and
classifying carcinogens, mutagens and teratogens. The group met first in April
1995 in Brussels and subsequently in Washington in June, to produce harmonized
criteria for identifying such chronic hazards.
Preliminary presentations of
this tripartite agreement in its draft form were given to the Science Advisory
soard to EPA and to the Office of Management and Budget. Following ratification
hy the sponsoring organizations, this document will be presented formally to
the respective government agencies.
The IAG will continue to work with its
European, Canadian, and Japanese counterparts to bring about a better
understanding of and scientific consensus on important future health, safety,
and environmental issues.
CMA 038368
IAG'S Major Accomplishments in 1984-1985
o
Joint IAG/JCIA Meeting
On September 24 and 25th the International Affairs Group met with
representatives of JCIA’3 Chemical Safety Control Committee (CSCC)
at the latter's Tokyo offices. For IAG this was the second of three
such meetings this year with chemical industry trade associations of
other countries.
These meetings addressed issues arising from th
laws and regulations intended to reduce chemical risks to health,
safety, and the environment.
IAG and JCIA had earlier exchanged discussion papers on each issue.
These included current status and proposed changes in TSCA and in
Japan's Chemical Substance Control Law.
Chemical inventories,
testing of new and existing substances, labeling, protection of
confidential information, specific chemical identity of substances,
and issues involving the export and import of hazardous substances,
particularly as proposed in the OECD Recommendation and UNEP
Provisional Notification Scheme, were also topics of exchanges
between the two groups.
U.S.-Japan activities to implement OECD recommendations on Good
Laboratory Practices were discussed.
The effect of U.S. right-co­
know laws, as these interact with labeling and confidentiality und r
OSHA and TSCA, were also topics of discussion.
The meeting achieved the following: agreed to implement OECD’s Good
Laboratory Practices, identified, differences between JCIA and IAG
interpretations of draft proposals of "OECD's Guides to Traders and
Manufacturers* in the export of hazardous substances. JCIA and IAG
agreed to work together to resolve these differences within the
framework of OECD's Business and Industry Advisory Council.
o
Joint IAG/ACIC Meeting
The IAG met in Canberra, Australia, on September 27 and 28, 1984,
with members of the Australian Chemical Industry Council (ACIC).
Discussions were focused on Australia's proposed law to implement
the
‘Notification and Assessment Scheme for New Chemicals.*
Representatives from two Australian State Governments, Victoria and
New South Wales, also participated in the meetings. The Australian
Government has announced that mandatory nationwide notification and
assessment for chemicals new to Australia would be implemented by
July 1985. The scheme is patterned on the EEC Sixth Amendm nt. The
prospective manufacturer/importer of a new chemical is required t
provide
information
similar
to that specified for Premarket
Notifications in EEC.
During the course of the meeting the IAG
delegation mentioned many concerns and problems with the proposed
Australian legislation.
As a direct result of these discussi ns,
the Australian Government has agreed to seriously review and modify
their
legislative
initiative, and the implementation of that
legislation has been significantly delayed.
CMA 038369
The ACIC and IAG agreed on the need to protect confidentiality of
trade secret chemical identities of substances, and the group agreed
to
review implementation of the Principles of Good Laboratory
Practice, worker and community right-to-know laws, and the exchange
of information on the export of hazardous substances.
o
Joint IAG/CCPA Meeting
On 29 and 30 May 1985, the IAG met with the Canadian Chemical
Producers Association in Toronto, Canada.
The format for the
meeting was that of a regularly scheduled CCPA meeting, where IAG
invited guests were asked to comment, where appropriate.
The
discussion lasted for two days and included:
a. a complete presentation of the Canadian Workplace Hazardous
Materials Information System (WHMIS) policy framework and review of
the status of the United States Occupational Safety & Health
Administration (OSHA) proposal,
b. discussion of risk assessment and risk management
legislation,
c. discussions of testing and notification as they appear in
the Environmental Containments Act (in Canada);
d. export notification from both the United States and Canadian
perspectives,
e. regulation of substances in Canada,
f. discussion of the OtA-developed CAES and NCHXC Programs (how
the CAES and NCSXC programs complement those now being implemented
in Canada), and
g. discussion of the Tripartite (IAG/CEFIC/CCPA) working Group
on Chronic Hazards.
Xt was agreed that IAG and its members would review the WHMXS
ingredient disclosure list, exchange key AXHC documents on risk
assessment, keep CCPA advised on reauthorization of the U.S. Toxic
Substances Control Act, and assist in obtaining full reciprocity in
the 0. S. for Canadian TDG Segulations.
o
Joint IAG/CEFIC/CCPA Working Group on Chronic Hazards
As a result of extensive discussions between the three organize*
tions, it was agreed that a group of environmental and health and
safety experts would convene in April 1985 in Brussels to lay out a
set of common definitions of chronic hazards. That effort produced
remarkably good agreement and the first of international stature on
the environmental health or safety issues involved.
A subsequent
meeting in June in Washington resolved technical differences within
the group and, by the end of August 1985, the Joint IAG/CEPIC/CCPA
Tripartite Agreement should be ratified by the sponsoring organiza­
tions and be ready for publication.
CMA 038370
Copies of this document will be sent to Appropriate U.S. governmental
agencies and to. the various governmental agencies within the European
Economic Community, as well as to the Canadian agencies responsible for
health, safety and the environment.
o
IAG prepared and delivered position papers on information exchange for
export of hazardous substances through the U. S. Business and Industry
Advisory Committee and the U. S. State Department to the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development Chemicals Group and its parent
Environment Committee.
IAG has supported the purposes of the OECD Chemicals Progranun , that is,
to harmonize chemicals regulation in member countries in an effort to
avoid trade barriers that may be caused by inconsistent laws and
regulations.
We have, however, opposed efforts by some officials in the
OECD Secretariat and member governments to turn the Programme into an
international regulatory system.
We have also urged implementation of
the past Chemicals Programme activity into national regulatory schemes
prior to initiation of any new areas of involvement from OECD.
Most OECD countries are just beginning to develop their toxic substances
control legislation, and time is needed for them to implement their own
systems and to assimilate existing OECD guidelines before any additional
substantive OECD activities are undertaken.
IAG believ s that an
international agreement or treaty on chemicals control is premature. IAG
is increasingly looked to by the (J.S. Government and by the OECD as. the
key voice representing U.S. industry.
On a continuing basis, IAG closely follows the agenda of OECD's Chemicals
Group, Management Committee, and their various Expert Groups, consulting
as necessary with the official U.S. Delegation to register U.S.
industry's views on key technical issues
o
The IAG has participated in an increased dialogue with various lem nts
of the United Nations.
Specifically, comments were submitted on UNEP's
Provisional
Notification
Guidelines, on
the
Export
of
Hazardous
Substances.
The State Department has accepted our views that listing
banned, severely restricted, withdrawn or unapproved (in the case of
pharmaceuticals) chemicals is an inappropriate mechanism and that thes
terms are faulty without further definition. An ad hoc task group of IAG
has extensively researched pro's and con's of participation in a jointly
sponsored (UNEP/UNCTC) conference, proposed for late 1985, on the health
and safety aspects of transnational corporations chemical operations in
developing countries. The task group has met with representatives of the
State Department, CBFIC, and people from the corporate comnunity to
discuss whether IAG should participate (as UNCTC has requested), or to
join a 'umbrella organization" such as the International Chamber of
Commerce and attend under their NGO status, or to withdraw from par­
ticipation entirely.
It is expected that this question will be resolved
within the next thirty days.
Irrespective of the outcome, however, the IAG will continue to improve
its liaison with organizations of the United Nations and with those
elements in the private sector dealing on a more direct basis with th UN
groups.
CMA
CMA 038371
EXHIBIT I
a.3./CANADA BILATERAL TRADE AGREEMENT
Proposed CMA Position
gacX ground
Several years ago, the Canadian government expressed interest in
That proposal contained
j ninber of industrial sectors including petrochemicals* The CMA
International Trade Conmittee held several meetings with the Canadian
chMical Producers Association (CCFA) Trade Conmittee during 1983 and
1984*
following those meetings, concern was expressed that a
product-by-product or sectoral approach would probably not meet with
acceptance by the U.S. chemical industry. The Trudeau Canadian
government did not make a formal request to the United States to enter
into negotiations.
% tons of bilateral free trade with the U.S.
The Mulroney Canadian government is also Interested in such a
trade negotiation with the United States.
However, the Canadians
apparently have come to believe that only an across-the-board
approach, not a sectoral approach, will receive consideration by the
(j.S, government. In anticipation of a Canadian overture for a
bilateral negotiation, the CMA International Trade Committee has
prepared the attached proposed position statement.
Reconmend ation
That the following specific conditions be met in order for any
bilateral trade agreement to exist between the two countries. These
conditions would include t
o
a
o
o
o
balanced benefits to both countries;
Canadian government policies which do not unduly
restrict investment or feedstock
availability and price;
tariff reductions across the board rather than
sectoral basis;
adequate dispute settlement procedures; and,
a requirement for 70 percent Canadian value
added for all eligible goods.
ACTION REQUIRED;
Approval of reconmended position
CMA 038372
Approved, International
Trade Committee
5/30/85
CMA Statement of Key Principles
Concerning a Bilateral
Free Trade Agreement Between
the United States and Canada
Any bilateral free trade agreement must confer balanced
benefits to both the United States and Canada.
Negotiations on the elimination of preferential Canadian
chemical feedstock and energy policies and foreign
investment restrictions must be an integral part of any U.S.
tariff negotiations with Canada.
In this regard, the U.S.
Government must not commit itself to any tariff cuts prior
to obtaining Canadian agreement to eliminate these
non-tariff trade and investment barriers.
Other non-tariff trade barriers, such as inadequate
protection of intellectual property rights, should also be
considered in any free trade negotiations between the United
States and Canada.
The tariff elimination components of a bilateral free trade
agreement between the United States and Canada should
include all chemicals and related products and should not be
restricted to chemical industry subsectors or specific
products.
The U.S. government should consult with the U.S. chemical
industry and provide adequate opportunities for timely
industry input before and during U.S. negotiations with
Canada.
Any free trade agreement should require that all products
eligible for duty-free entry into the United States under
the agreement must have a Canadian value added level of 70
percent or greater, with an unlimited allowance permitted
for the value of U.S. components.
A bilateral free trade agreement with Canada should provide
for the mandatory reimposition of duties in the event of
non-fulfillment of the conditions of the agreement.
Any bilateral free trade agreement with Canada should
contain an adequate and binding dispute settlement
mechanism.
Free trade negotiations with Canada should also address
other issues, such as how temporary trade distortions caused
by currency fluctuations and injury to a domestic industry
by duty-free entry of products will be handled, to avoid
impairment of the benefits under any bilateral free trade
agreement.
CMA 038373
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION:
COMMENTS ON A BILATERAL FREE
TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES
AND CANADA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The following comments of the Chemical Manufacturers
Association (CMA) on a possible bilateral free trade agreement
between the United States and Canada present issues which CMA
believes must be addressed by the United States prior to entering
into any such agreement.
First, CMA believes that any bilateral free trade agreement .
must confer balanced benefits to both the United States and
Canada.
One country must not benefit to the detriment of the
other.
Second, CMA believes that the long-term objective of such a
free trade agreement is to achieve an open environment for
international trade and investment unencumbered by barriers and
governmental intervention in the marketplace.
In this regard, we
believe that any free trade agreement must address non-tariff
barriers to trade.
For example, we believe that negotiations on
the elimination of preferential Canadian chemical feedstock and
energy policies and foreign investment restrictions must be an
integral part of any U.S. free trade negotiations with Canada.
CMA 038374
Moreover, we believe that other non-tariff trade barriers, such
as inadequate protection of intellectual property rights, should
also be considered in any free trade negotiations between the two
countries.
CMA is aware that the Administration is evaluating the
merits of the possible establishment of a subsectoral free trade
arrangement with Canada on petrochemicals.
Moreover, the
Canadian chemical industry has proposed that any such
negotiations address only certain products in the petrochemical
subsector.
CMA is opposed to any chemical industry product or
subsectoral approach.
Instead, we believe that any tariff
negotiations with Canada, coupled as indicated above with
negotiations on non-tariff barriers, must address all chemicals
and related products.
To ensure the effectiveness of the tariff elimination
component of a free trade agreement with Canada, any such
agreement should require that all products eligible for duty-free
entry into the United. States under the agreement have a Canadian
value added level of at least 70 percent of the value of the
product.
The value of U.S. origin raw materials or other
components incorporated into a Canadian product in Canada should
be considered Canadian value added for purposes of the 70 percent
test.
CMA 038375
Moreover, CMA believes that a free trade agreement with
Canada should:
provide for the reimposition of duties in the •
event of non-fulfillment of agreement conditions; address oth r
issues, such as how temporary trade distortions caused by
currency fluctuations and injury to a domestic industry by
duty-free entry of products will be handled; and contain an
adequate and binding dispute settlement mechanism (the dispute
settlement provisions contained in the U.S./Israeli agreement are
not adequate in our opinion).
Finally, CMA believes that it is absolutely essential that
r
the U.S. Administration provide adequate and timely opportunities
for chemical industry input before undertaking any free trade
negotiations with Canada, as well as during any negotiation
process.
CMA urges the utilization of the Industry Sector
Advisory Committee (ISAC) for this process.
However, we believe
that other industry groups, such as our own Association, must
also be included in this consultative process.
CMA believes that, if the issues discussed in our comments
are considered by the United States Government before
negotiations with Canada begin and if they are adequately
addressed in any free trade agreement with Canada, then trade
benefits mutually advantageous to both countries are achievable
through such an agreement.
CMA 038376
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION:
COMMENTS ON A BILATERAL FREE
TRADE AGREEMENT BETWEEEN THE UNITED STATES
AND CANADA
INTRODUCTION
The United States and Canadian Governments are considering
the desirability of a bilateral free trade agreement between the
two countries.
As a part of this analysis, the United States
International Trade Commission (USITC) and the inter-agency Trade
policy Staff Committee (TPSC) are currently investigating the
probable economic effect of providing duty-free treatment for
selected imports from Canada.
The results of these
investigations are intended to assist the President in assessing
the impact of establishing bilateral free trade in selected
industry subsectors, including certain petrochemicals.
The Chemical Manufacturers Association wishes to make the
following comments on a bilateral free trade agreement between
the United States and Canada.
The Chemical Manufacturers
Association (CMA) is a nonprofit trade association whose member
companies represent more than 90 percent of the productive
capacity of basic industrial chemicals in the United States.
The comments contained in this paper are not directed to
aither the USITC or the TPSC investigation.
Rather, they present
issues which CMA believes must be addressed by the U.S.
Government prior to entering into any bilateral free trade
agreement with Canada.
CMA 038377
GENERAL COMMENTS
The United States and Canada are each other’s largest
trading partner.
The total trade between the two countries in
1984 equalled $113 billion.
Chemical trade represents a
substantial portion of this figure.
In 1984, Canadian chemical
exports to the United States were about $3.13 billion, and United
States chemical exports to Canada totalled $2.75 billion.
This
reflects a 1984 chemical trade balance of about $379 million in
The chemical industry of each country has substantial direct
investment in the other country.
In many cases, Canadian
subsidiaries of U.S. companies produce intermediate or finished
products, not only for the Canadian market, but also for the
United States and third country markets.
In addition, the strengths of the U.S. and Canadian chemical
industries complement each other.
Canada has a rich base in
natural resources, especially in hydrocarbons, with installed
capacity for large volumes of certain basic chemicals and inter­
mediates.
The United States has a highly developed basic
chemical and downstream chemical processing industry, as well as
capacity to produce a variety of commodity chemicals.
The United
—^U.S. Dep't. of Commerce, Bureau of Census* Highlights of
U.S. Export and Import Trade (FT990: December, 1984).
CMA 038378
States also has the world's largest market for products of the
chemical industry.
III. SPECIFIC COMMENTS
Any Bilateral Free Trade Agreement Must Confer Balanced
Benefits to Both the United States and Canada.
CMA believes that the benefits of any bilateral agreement
must be even-handed; one country must not benefit to the
detriment of the other.
The statutory authority.for such
agreements supports this contention.
Section 102 of the Trade
Act of 1974, as amended by Section 401 of the Trade and Tariff
Act of 1984,
indicates that such negotiations should be
conducted on the basis of mutuality.
Moreover, the legislative
history of the 1984 Act states the intention of Congress that
bilateral agreements of the sort proposed with Canada must be
"reciprocal and mutually advantageous.” —
$2112), as amended by Section 401(a) (2) of the Trade and Tariff
CMA 038379
Any Free Trade Agreement with Canada Must Address
Non-Tariff Barriers to Trade~
Negotiations on the Elimination of Preferential Canadian
Chemical Feedstock and Energy Policies and Foreign
Investment Restrictions Must be an Integral Part of Any Free
Trade Negotiations with Canada.
CMA believes that the negotiations between the United States
and Canada on a bilateral free trade agreement should not be
limited to the subject of tariff-cutting.
The elimination of
trade distortions caused by preferential Canadian chemical
feedstock and energy policies and by Canadian foreign investment
restrictions must also be adequately addressed in such
negotiations.
Furthermore/ we believe that the U.S. Gov rnment
must not commit itself to eliminating any tariffs prior to
obtaining Canadian agreement to eliminate the trade distorting
effects of these restrictive policies.
Ample support for the
inclusion of non-tariff barriers in such negotiations is found in
the Trade Act of 1974 and the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984. —
Sections 102(a)/ 103 and 105 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19
CMA 038380
Canadian Raw -Material and Energy Policies
CMA believes that the internal energy policies implemented
under the Canadian National Energy Policy
(CNEP) have had an
adverse effect on market mechanisms in Canada and on Canadian
trade with the United States in energy-related products, such as
chemicals.
We understand that the CNEP is under review by the
Canadian government and is likely to be changed.
In any case, as
part of a bilateral free trade agreement, we urge that the United
States Government ensure that present and future Canadian
governments' feedstock supply, price, and access policies do not
serve as a barrier to otherwise fair competition.
This is necessary to avoid the creation, or perpetuation, of
an artificial advantage for the producers of one country over
those of the other.
Such an assurance is particularly important
to industries, such as the petrochemical industry, for which
feedstock pricing and availability are critical because the cost
of feedstocks represents the largest element of cost for many
petrochemical products.
If the trade distorting effects of the
Canadian governments' policies with respect to the supply and
price of, and access to, petrochemical feedstocks are not
neutralized, then those Canadian policies will largely determine
the conditions of competition in international trade in
petrochemicals between the United States and Canada, undermining
the workings of an open market system.
CMA 038381
Canadian Investment Policy
The United States Government must address differences in
investment policy between the United States and Canada to ensure
that U.S. companies wishing to invest in the Canadian chemical
industry are not subject to different or more stringent
requirements than are Canadian investors in Canada.
In 1983# a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
panel found the Canadian Foreign Investment Review Act (FIRA) to
be in violation of GATT Article III because FIRA made approval
to
e
invest in Canada contingent upon a foreign investor's acceptance
of often onerous performance requirements to which domestic
Canadian investors were not subject.
We understand that the Canadian Government has begun to
administer FIRA in a less restrictive manner and that the
Canadian Parliament has passed the "Investment Canada Act" as
FIRA's replacement. —
while this new legislation is supposed to
liberalize the requirements imposed on foreign investors, s v ral
restrictions will remain, especially on foreign acquisitions of
existing Canadian companies.
It remains to be seen how the new
Act will be implemented.
—^General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Report of the
Panel, Canada-Administration of the Foreign Investment Review
—Introduced in the House of Commons on December 7, 1984.
CMA 038382
In any event, CMA urges the United States Government to seek
the elimination of discriminatory Canadian investment
restrictions, other than those dealing with national security,
prior to finalizing a tariff-cutting agreement with Canada.
Other Non-Tariff Trade Barriers, Such as Inadequate
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights, Should Also be
Considered in Any Free Trade Negotiations Between the United
States and Canada.
There is growing recognition in the United States and abroad
that the effective protection of intellectual property rights is
essential to increased innovation and productivity and is a vital
part of international trade decisions.
Provisions aimed at
encouraging such protection in other countries are contained in
the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984, —^
the topic is being included
in numerous bilateral trade and investment negotiations, and
efforts are underway by some industry groups to have intellectual
property rights included in a new round of multilateral trade
negotiations.
In this context, CMA urges the United States Government to
address the issue of protection of intellectual property rights
as part of any free trade negotiations with Canada.
Canada has
traditionally recognized the importance of providing such
and Tari7l“Acto7 1984; 98 Stat. 3001, 3005, 3019 and 3021.
CMA 038383
protection.
However, some problem areas remain, for example, in
the pharmaceutical field.
We believe that a free trade agreement
with Canada should include a resolution of these issues, as well
as provisions eliminating any other non-tariff trade barriers
that may exist.
The Tariff Elimination Components of a Free Trade
Agreement with Canada Must be Ef?ective.
The Tariff Elimination Components of A Bilateral
Free Trade Aqreement~^etween the United Statesand Canada
sKould Include All Chemicals and Related Products and Not be
Restricted to Chemical Industry Subsectorsor Specific
Products.
A key issue in the U.S.-Canada negotiations is whether
import duties or tariffs will be eliminated "across the board" or
only on specific industry sectors, subsectors, or products.
CMA is opposed to any chemical industry product or subs ctoral
approach.
Instead, we believe that tariff negotiations with
Canada must address all chemicals and related products.
We
believe such broader negotiations offer greater potential for
mutual trade benefits.
CMA 038384
Any Free Trade Agreement with Canada Should Require That All
products Eligible for Duty-Free Entry Into the United States
Under~the Agreement Must Have a Canadian Value Added Level inclucTinqr the Value of U.S. Origin Components- of at Least
70 Percent of the Value of the Product.
A minimum level of "Canadian value added" must be a
condition for duty-free entry into the United States under a
bilateral free trade agreement with Canada.
This criterion would
be fully consistent with the goal of enhanced U.S./Canadian trade
and would help to prevent potential abuses of a special trade
relationship through transshipment practices.
The value added
threshold must be high enough to prevent products of third
countries being passed through Canada to the United States after
only formulation or minor finishing operations have been
performed in Canada.
CMA urges that the minimum domestic Canadian value added b
set at 70 percent of the appraised value of the product at the
time of entry, rather them the 35 percent required under the
Generalized System of Preferences, the Caribbean Basin Economic
Recovery Act, and the proposed bilateral free trade agreement
with Israel.
A higher percentage is necessary in an agreement
with Canada because Canada is not a developing country and should
not be given the liberal domestic value added requirements that
have been granted as a concession to such countries.
In
addition, CMA recommends that the value of U.S. origin raw
materials or other components incorporated into a Canadian
product in Canada be considered to be Canadian value added for
purposes of the 70 percent test to promote bilateral trade.
CMA 038386
A Free Trade Agreement with Canada Should Provide for the
Mandatory^ Reimposition of Duties in the"Event of
Non-Fulfillment of the Conditions of the Agreement.
Any U.S./Canada bilateral free trade agreement should
include a "snap-back" provision under which United States import
duties eliminated under the agreement automatically return to
column 1 rates if the conditions of the free trade agreement are
no longer fulfilled.
For example, if investment restrictions
were reimposed by Canada or if Canada imposed a new non-tariff
barrier to U.S. exports, then the duties on imports from Canada
should snap-back.
Free Trade Negotiations with Canada Should Also Address
Other Issues, Such as How Temporary Trade Distortions Caused
by Currency Fluctuations and Injury to a Domestic Industry
by Dutv-^ree Entry of Products Will be Handled, to Avoid
Impairment of the Benefits Under Any Bilateral Free Trade
Agreement.
Two difficult subjects that CMA believes must also b
addressed in the context of bilateral free trade negotiations
with Canada are how to handle temporary trade distortions caused
by currency fluctuations and what to do if a domestic industry is
injured by the duty-free entry of products under an agreement.
Consideration should be given to imposition of a surcharge to
correct the temporary trade distortions in the first instance and
to imposition of temporary safeguard duties to eliminate the
injury in the second.
In this regard, CMA assumes the U.S.
unfair trade statutes will continue to apply to imports fr m
Canada.
CMA 038386
Any Bilateral Free Trade Agreement with Canada Should
Contain an Adequate and Binding Dispute Settlement
Mechanism.
CMA believes that any bilateral free trade agreement with
Canada should contain procedures for the settlement of disputes
between Canada and the United States that arise under the
agreement.
We do not believe that the procedures contained in
the proposed U.S./Israeli agreement are adequate for this
purpose.
Instead, we recommend that dispute settlement procedures in
any U.S./Canada agreement:
settlement of disputes;
provide for a rapid and effectiv
contain mechanisms for a binding
decision in the event of a stalemate; and, most importantly,
provide for significant industry input in the dispute settlement
process.
The U.S. Government Should Consult with the U.S.
Chemical Industry and Provide Adequate Opportunities
for Timely Industry Input Before and During U.S,
Negotiations With Canada.
As mandated by the Trade Act of 1974, and reaffirmed in th
Trade Agreements Act of 1979, —
a structure of formal industry
sector advisory committees (ISACs) representing U.S. companies
from all segments of U.S. business is in place.
There is a
as amended bv Section 1103 of the Trade Agreements Act of 1979,
JrStat. JdfiilO.
CMA 038387
widespread perception that the ISACs were not advised or
consulted adequately in the course of developing the U.S./Israel
Free Trade Agreement nor in earlier and subsequent U.S.
Government discussions with Mexico which led to the signing o£
the U.S./Mexican Subsidies Agreement.
CMA strongly urges the
U.S. Government to avail itself fully of this mechanism for
eliciting private sector input on a timely basis if any
consultations on a U.S./Canada bilateral agreement proceed.
Moreover, we believe that appropriate mechanisms must exist
to allow for additional industry input, such as from CMA and
other trade associations, into any such negotiations so that all
significant considerations can be addressed prior to any
commitments having been made.
CONCLUSION
CMA believes that, if the issues raised in this paper are
considered by the United States Government before negotiations
with Canada begin and are adequately addressed in any free trade
agreement with Canada, then trade benefits mutually advantageous
to both countries are achievable through such an agreement.
CMA
CMA 038388
r
exhibit j-i
I
REVIEW OF CMA GROUNDWATER PROGRAM
AMD
PROPOSED POLICY ON GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
1
I
1
This presentation is intended to review the development of CMA's
groundwater program and to request approval of one new element of OiA's evolving
groundwater policy.
Groundwater is an important natural resource. It has many and varied uses
including drinking water supplies, crop irrigation, livestock watering and
industrial water supplies. Approximately 50% of all Americans obtain all or
part of their drinking water from groundwater sources.
Recently groundwater issues have come to the forefront. Many groundwater
issues are or soon will be before Congress, EPA, state legislatures and
regulatory agencies, and on the agendas of environmental groups, industry groups,
and consensus organizations *
o
Senator Durenberger is currently holding oversight hearings
on groundwater. Senator Durenberger will introduce
groundwater legislation in September 1985 which may
significantly affect chemical industry operations (siting,
transportation, product use, waste disposal).
o
In 1985, 135 groundwater related bills were introduced in 25
states. Most bills contain provisions which significantly
impact chemical industry operations. An even greater level
of state activity is expected in 1986.
o
Some states, such as Wisconsin and Florida have enacted
detailed legislation for groundwater management programs.
o
EPA recently developed and is moving to implement a groundwater protection strategy.
o
Consensus groups, such as the Conservation foundation and the
National Water Alliance have formed task groups to address
the issues.
o
other trade associations such as NACA, SOCMA and NEDA are
developing policy statements.
o
Bivironmsntal groups such as NRDC, EDF and EPI (Environmental
Policy Institute) are addressing the issue in various forums.
CMA 038389
CMA Objective
To achieve a beneficial balance between chemical industry operations and
protection of human health and aquatic resources.
Elements and Status of CMA Groundwater Policy
CMA is developing a comprehensive groundwater management policy which
addresses federal and state legislative and regulatory responsibilities. CMA's
position on the federal/state split continues to be that:
o
states should have responsibility for defining. Implementing
and enforcing groundwater management programs.
o
the federal government should provide guidance, technical
transfer and funds to aid states in their efforts.
CMA's groundwater management policy will address all critical aspects of
the groundwater issue. These aspects include groundwater standards, monitoring,
use classification, groundwater protection and product handling. CMA actions t
date are summarized in Table I.
Proposed Groundwater Protection Policy
The proposed groundwater protection policy is before the Board of Directors
for approval. This policy states that groundwater is an important natural
resource that must be protected.
States have the leadership role in protecting and managing this resource,
and should act on these responsibilities by developing and implementing
groundwater management progrmas. Groundwater quality protection programs are an
integral part of broader groundwater management program.
As states develop their protection progrmas, CMA recamends that states
consider instituting requirements for appropriate facility design and operating
practices developed by each facility that will minimise the release of
pollutants (groundwater protection practices).
Also, CMA recognises that states may choose to institute the f llowing
practices as part of a groundwater management prograi a) a groundwater
withdrawal program to protect groundwater quality, b) land use planning in areas
where the potential for adverse imp acts from groundwater contain stion from
future activities are significant} e) a permit progrma for point source
discharges to groundwater where such discharges are not already controlled under
existing regulations*
Requested Action
Groundwater progrm review for infozmation only*
requested for one element of the groundwater prograi
Groundwater Quality (full text attached).
Specific approval is
Policy on Frotecti n of
CMA
CMA 038390
CMA GROUNDWATER ACTIVITIES
Element
Description of am Position and Status
Groundwatar Standards
States should maintain groundwater at
existing quality or at a quality necessary
to maintain use, provided that standards
are applied where groundwater is with­
drawn for use* The federal goveriment
should develop use-based criteria s
states can set reasonable standards*
This policy was approved by the Board
of Directors in June 1985.
1
Groundwater Monitoring
This position addresses when, where and
how to monitor groundwater to- insure
that desired groundwater quality is not
impaired. The position calls for tech­
nically sound methods for monitoring
and requirements for technical
competence of those performing the
monitoring. This policy was approved
by the Board of Directors in June 1985.
Alternative Supplies of
Drinking Water
This policy describes the process a
governmental unit should use to deter­
mine when alternative drinking water
supplies should be provided. This is
an elaboration of current Board
approved Superfund policy.
Sols Source Aquifer
This policy exports restrictions on
activities over sole source aquifers
to prevent groundwater contmnatlon
since the aquifer is the sole source
of drinking water. The current policy
is an elaboration of Board approved
Use Classification
Our current policy states that groundwater should be maintained at a quality
necessary to support current and future
uses. The position was approved by the
Board of Directors in 1982. Re-evalua­
tion and appropriate modification f
the policy is underway.
Product Handling
This policy should address product
handling and distribution procedures to
prevent contamination of groundwater.
Plana for policy development are
underway.
CMA 038391
EXHIBIT J-2
PROPOSED CMA POSITION
PROTECTION OF GROUNDWATER QUALITY
introduction
Groundwater is an important natural resource that must be protsctsd.
CMA
advocates protsction of groundwater quality, through managamant of tha resourca
y- «xiitin9 quality or at a quality nacassary to maintain dasignatad uses.
Groundwater quality should ba dataminad where water is withdrawn for usa.
This document provides concapts for stata groundwitar quality protaction
?cogrsns. Protaction programs ars just ona aspact of ccmprahansiva groundwatar
gjnagamant progrmas. Tha concapts addrassad in this papar apply to a wide
cross-section of private and public activities (industrial, domestic, municipal,
agricultural, etc.) that may affect groundwatar.
tor industrial activities, these recommendations cover manufacturing and
uicillary facilities other than waste disposal operations which have tha
potential to contaminate groundwatar. Waste disposal operations are already
covered by existing state and federal statutes, regulations and programs.
Decisions about managing groundwatar resources have historically and
appropriately been the responsibility of state and local governments. In view
of tha localized nature of groundwatar use and the land use considerations tied
so closely to groundwater management, states continue to be best suited to
develop and implement groundwater management program. Some states have
designed or are in the process of designing programs tailored to meet their
specific needs and considerations. CMA encourages all states to develop such
program.
In developing groundwater quality protection programs, CMA believes that
states should consider instituting performance requirements for each facility
that will minimise the release of pollutants (groundwater protection practices
Also, CMA realizes that statss may choose to institute one or more of the
following practices as part of the groundwater management progrAt a) a
groundwater withdrawal program to protect groundwater quality; b) land use
planning in areas where the potential for adverse Impacts from groundwatar
contamination from future activities are significant; and c) a permit program
for point source discharges to groundwater where such dischargus are not already
controlled under existing regulations.
Sroundwatsr Protection Practices
The institution of requirements for appropriata facility design and
derating practices (GPP's) is an acceptable and appropriate means of protecting
groundwater quality and of minimising the potential for groundwater dischargee
CMA 038392
from ill source*. Such practices should be developed by the affected facility,
be implemented on a facility-specific basis and include the concept of
hydrogeologic vulnerability. Surveillance programs should be instituted, where
necessary, to demonstrate the effectiveness of the specific protection practice.
In, addition, a GPP should include educational and training programs for those
responsible for implementation.
GPP1s should address current and planned activities and should be
documented. They should also include any necessary plots, plans, drawings or
maps. In addition, the GPP plan should be modified whenever changes at a
facility materially increase the potential for significant releases of
pollutants or where actual releases indicate the plan is inadequate.
Where states opt to include GPP‘s as part of their groundwater quality
protection program, such practices could include an inspection provision and
trigger mechanism for more detailed plan review when discharges occur.
The federal government should assist states in developing GPP requirements
by providing guidance and technical assistance and by creating the opportunity
for information exchange. This would assist states in determining the most
effective approaches consistent with their specific needs.
Absent regulatory requirements, groundwater protection practices are still
an appropriate and necessary procedure for those whose land surface activities
could affect groundwater quality.
Other state Considerations
Improper withdrawal of quantities of water can affect groundwater quality
by causing saltwater intrusion, undesirable changes in groundwater flow
agenda
meeting of the cma board of directors
Monday and Tuesday, January 27-28, 1986
Great Heron Hall
Ocean Reef Club, Key Largo, Florida
Monday, January 27, 1986
TAB
1
Call to Order and Approval of Minutes of
October 21, 1985 Meeting — Chairman Sella
Report of the Chemical Industry Trade Advisor —
Dexter F. Baker, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.
Annual Report of the International Trade Committee
Chairman: Allan J. Spilner, Rohm, and Haas Company
10:15-10:45
Report of the New Jersey Chemical Industry Council —
J. B. Reid, Chairman, CIC/NJ (American Cyanamid
Company); and Hal Bozarth, Executive Director,
CIC/NJ
10:45-11:10
Annual Report of the Tax Policy Committee
Chairman: William M. Bellamy, Jr.,
Union Carbide Corporation
11:10-11:25
Tax Reform Legislation Status Report and Outlook—
St. Clair J. Tveedie, American Cyanamid Company
(Chairman, GRC Tax Legislation Task Group)
3
11:25-11:45
Report of the President — Robert A. Roland
- Program and Issue Highlights
4
11:45-11:50
New Business
a
11:50
1
Annual Report of the Health and Safety Committee
de Nemours & Company
2
Adjourn
CMA 038558
Tuesdav, January 28, 1986
Call to Order — Chairman Sella
Report of the Executive Committee —
Chairman Clark
Report of Nominating Committee — Chairman
Sella
Association Activities
a. Treasurer's Report — Gary C. Herman
b. Internal Administrative Changes —
Gary C. Herman
Proposed Policy on Chemical Tariff Cutting
in Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN):
Consideration of Executive Committee
Recommendations — Allan J. Spilner, Rohm
and Haas Company (Chairman, International
Trade Committee)
Proposed Policy on the Reauthorlzatlon of
the Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act: Consideration of Executive Committee
Recommendations — Robert A. Christman,
Mobay Chemical Corporation (Chairman,
Distribution Committee)
Annual Report of the Distribution Committee
Chairman: Robert A. Christman
Proposed Program to Increase Coordination of
Industry Political Activity: Consideration
of Executive Committee Recommendations —
Kenneth E. Davis, Rohm and Haas Company
(Chairman, Government Relations Committee);
and Ken V. Cole, Allied-Signal Inc.
(Chairman, GRC Campaign Task Group)
Annual Report of the Cotmuunlcatlons Committee
Chairman: Michael E. Thompson, Amoco Chemi
cals Company
10:20-10:27
Annual Report of the Patent and Trademark
Committee Chairman: Thomas I. O'Brien,
Union Carbide Corporation
Toxic Air Emissions
a. Overview of Issue and Activities of Ad
Hoc Executive Commlttee-EMC Work Group —
Harold A. Sorgenti, Board Vice Chairman
10:27—10:35
h. Status Report and Outlook on Federal and
State Air Toxics Legislation and Regula­
tion — Philip C. Holladav, Shell Chemical
Company (Chairman, CRC Clean Air Act Task
Group)
10:35-11:05
c. Proposed Air Toxics Control Policy and Im­
plementation Recommendations and Options —
Harold A. Sorgenti; Frank C. Berryman,
Chevron Chemical Company (Chairman, En­
vironmental Management Committee); and
Richard A. Symuleski, Amoco Corporation
(Environmental Management Committee)
11:05-11:25
d. Proposed Air Toxics Legislative Principles —
Vincent J. Marchesanl, ICI Americas Inc.
(Sponsor, EMC Air Issues); Robert F. Kelley,
Union Carbide Corporation (Chairman, EMC Air
Legislative Issues Task Group); and Philip C.
Holladay
11:25-11:35
e. Final Discussion and Action on Air Toxics
Emissions Control Policy and Legislative
Principles —- Harold A. Sorgenti
11:35-12:10
Superfund Reauthorlzatlon
a. Overview and Association Activities— William
M. Stover
b. Legislative Status — Wells Denyes, Eastman
Kodak Company (Chairman, GRC Superfund Task
Group)
c. Discussion of Funding Policy and Consideration
of Executive Committee Recommendations — George
12:10-12:15
New Business
12:15
Adjournment
a
2307
MINUTES of the three-hundred sixth meeting of the Board of Directors of the
Chemical Manufacturers Association, Inc., held in the Great Heron Hall, Ocean Reef
Club, Key Largo, Florida, on Monday and Tuesday, January 27 and 28, 1986.
There were present:
Directors
Harold A. Sorgentl, Vice Chairman
Robert A. Roland, President
Dexter F. Baker
Max S. Bass
Alan Belzer (1)
Arthur E. Biggs
Robert D. Cadleux
Carlyle G. Caldwell
Harry Corless
Robert W. Davis
Keith H. Edmondson
Robert B. Fell
F. Jack Fitzgerald
Robert C. Forney
D. George Harris
John W. Johnstone, Jr.
Robert D. Kennedy
Hans H. Kopper
Sidney H. Leahy
Carl W. Lorentzen
H. Eugene McBrayer
Keith R. McRennon
Robert L. Mitchell (1)
Seymour S. Preston, III
Thomas E. Reilly, Jr.
M. Whitson Sadler
James F. Schorr
Charles E. Stewart
S. Jay Stewart
William Wlshnlck
Secretary:
Treasurer:
General Counsel:
Charles W. Van Vlack
Gary C. Herman
David F. Zoll
By Invitation:
William M. Bellamy, Jr. - Union Carbide Corporation
Frank W. Berryman - Chevron Chemical Company
Hal Bozarth - Chemical Industry Council of New Jersey
Robert A. Christman - Mobay Corporation (2)
Geraldine V. Cox - CMA
Kenneth E. Davis - Rohm and Haas Company
Wells Denyea - Eastman Kodak Company
Edward D. Griffith - ARCO Chemical Company
Philip C. Holladay - Shell Oil Company
Edwin C. Holmer - Exxon Chemical Company
Jon C. Holtzman - CMA
E. Hamilton Hurst - Nalco Chemical Company
John F. Hussey - Monsanto Company (2)
Robert F. Kelley - Union Carbide Corporation (2)
Conrad Kent (SOCMA) - Stauffer Chemical Company
Vincent J. Marchesani - ICI Americas Inc.
Thomas I. O'Brien - Union Carbide Corporation (2)
Michael A. Pierle • Monsanto Company
J. B. Reid - American Cyanamld Company (1)
Allan J. Spllner - Rohm and Haas Company (2)
CMA 038561
2308
William M. Stover - CMA
Richard A. Symuleski - Amoco Chemicals Company
St. Clair J. Tweedie - American Cyanamid Company (1)
Juliana H. Van Egmond - American Cyanamid Company
James P. Watkins - American Cyanamid Company
Benjamin Woodhouse - Dow Chemical U.S.A.
t
First day only
Second day only
k
t
l
MINUTES OF THE OCTOBER 21, 1985, MEETING
The meeting was called to order at 9:00 a.m. on Monday, January 27, by
Vice Chairman Sorgentl. The minutes of the October 21, 1985, Board meeting were
approved as distributed.
TRADE ADVISOR
Mr. Baker presented the annual report of the Office of the Chemical
Industry Trade Advisor (OCITA). A copy of Mr. Baker's report is attached as
Exhibit A.
I
I
INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMITTEE
Mr. Spllner presented the annual report of the International Trade
Committee. A copy of Mr. Spllner's remarks Is attached as Exhibit B. Following
the presentation, there was a brief discussion of the shifting nature of the
Industry's exports from commodities to specialty products. Messrs. Baker and
Spllner agreed to make available additional information detailing these develop­
ments and this impact.
HEALTH AND SAFETY COMMITTEE
Dr. Karrh presented the annual report of the Health and Safety Committee. A copy of Dr. Karrh's remarks is attached as Exhibit C. At the conclusion
of the presentation, there was additional discussion of the CAER program and the
extent to which it had been Implemented by all of CMA's member companies. It was
agreed that a follow-up letter would be sent to companies who have not reported.
In addition, it was also agreed that a status report on CAER implementation by all
member companies should be sent to Executive Contacts.
j
j
I
i
With respect to product liability reform, there was discussion of the
Danforth proposal as wall as related activities under way at the state level.
CMA 038562
2309
Mr. Roland expressed his appreciation to Dr, Karrh and the members of
che committee for the outstanding job which had been done to consolidate a range
of extremely Important activities and to structure CMA's advocacy in these areas
in a very positive manner.
MEW JERSEY CHEMICAL INDUSTRY COUNCIL
Mr. Roland introduced this report by reviewing the presentation given at
the September Board meeting by Mr. W. T. Wood, Jr., on behalf of a special ad hoc
group. This group had conducted a study of the status and programs of the 18
state chemical organizations. Mr. Roland reported that as a result of comments
made by several of the directors for more specific requests for action regarding
individual CICs, Mr. Wood solicited requests for support from the various state
organizations at their annual meeting in October. The New Jersey CXC was the
first to respond to this opportunity.
Mr. Reid, Chairman of the NJ CIC, presented an overview of the Council
and its history, activities and programs. He highlighted the evolution of the
Council during the past 30 years from an organization whose primary purpose was
educational to one with a respected advocacy focus.
Mr. Bozarth, Executive Director of the NJ CIC, reported on key legisla­
tive and regulatory issues which have had a substantial impact on the industry,
not only in New Jersey, but around the country as well. He provided details of
the CIC's programs to address these issues and to support CMA. priorities such as
CAER.
Mr. Reid requested additional support In five areas, identified in
Exhibit D, which would markedly increase the CIC’s effectiveness. Those recom­
mendations were unanimously adopted. In the discussion following the report, the
Board expressed their strong support for the NJ CIC and the program it presented.
TAX POLICY COMMITTEE
Mr. Bellamy presented the annual report of the Tax Policy Committee. A
copy of Mr. Bellamy’s report is attached as Exhibit E. He highlighted the suc­
cessful role of the Committee in representing the particular concerns of the
chemical industry which are not being adequately represented by other business
organizations. He also described the Committee's efforts, to date, with respect
to the pending tax reform legislation.
TAX REFORM LEGISLATION
Mr. Tweedle presented a report (Exhibit F) on the status and outlook for
tax reform legislation in this Congress. There was considerable discussion of the
impact of tax reform on the industry and the appropriate role and level of effort
for the Association with respect to this issue. CMA's posture, pursuant to
Executive Committee and Board discussion in the fall, has been to focus on those
Issues of critical Importance to the Industry, particularly those which are not
being adequately advocated by other business groups.
The CMA plan was premised
on an exceptionally high degree of member company participation and leadership.
CMA 038563
2310
Further discussion of this issue was deferred to the Executive Committee meeting
that afternoon.
NEW BUSINESS
Mr. Davis spoke to the necessity of taking a more deliberate approach to
coalitioning and urged the Executive Committee to consider a more efficient means
of accessing the resources and coordinating the advocacy of the other chemical and
related Industry associations. Mr. Clark indicated that this was on the Executive
Committee's agenda.
Mr. Sorgentl recognized the presence of former Board Chairman Holmer.
The issue of a letter sent by Mr. Roland regarding the observance of
Martin Luther King Day was discussed.
The Board adjourned at 11:45 a.m. until Tuesday, January 28.
Tuesday, January 28, 1986
The meeting was called to order by Chairman Sella at 8:00 a.m.
PRESIDENT'S REPORT
Mr. Roland's report Is attached as Exhibit G.
dents highlighted the following Issues:
Departmental Vice Presi­
Formation of three new special programs and continued
cooperation between CMA, AAR and RFX.
Developments relating to the insurance issue, includ­
ing the formation of the Special Committee on Insur­
ance and discussion of possible commercial insurance
vehicles under way outside of CMA. Smaller companies
Interested in exploring such solutions to their
Insurance needs were urged to communicate with CMA.
Also discussed were developments relating to EPA's
Superfund enforcement policy and two recent victories
for CMA involving the Federal Maritime Commission and
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
W.M. Stover
Developments relating to the implementation of Gramm/
Rudman/Holllngs.
J.C. Holtzman
Increased media attention to the air toxics issue.
CMA 038664
2311
i
1
i
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Chairman Clark reported on the itema discussed and the actions taken by
che Executive Committee on the preceding day. Those actions taken were:
i
1
Approved six appointments to fill vacancies on various standing
committees.
Discussed preliminary options relating to the 1986/87 budget
process.
Approved the formation of a Special Committee on Insurance and
discussed other possible CMA Insurance related activities.
1
Approved, for Board consideration, the nomination of Howard M.
Nelson of Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Corporation to fill che
vacancy on the Board created by the resignation of Donald Smith.
i
I
Approved, for Board consideration, a proposed policy on Chemical
Tariff Cutting In Multilateral Trade Negotiations (with a minor
amendment),
1
i
i
1
1
1
Approved, for Board consideration (with the understanding that che
position on creating a hazardous materials response fund be stated
more positively), a proposed policy on the Reauthorlzatlon of the
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
I
Discussed a proposed program to Increase Coordination of Industry
Political Activity. Although there was general agreement that che
objectives of the program deserved support, the proposal was tabled
until the March meeting, pending the resolution of certain legal
concerns.
1
1
i
t
Approved, for Board consideration (with certain minor changes), an
Air Toxics Control Policy. Also agreed to, for Internal use In
implementing the policy, a set of "Procedures for Consideration by
Member Companies." In addition, discussed legislative principles.
Implementation Issues and plans.
Discussed Issues relating to Superfund reauthorlzatlon and agreed
that no change In formal Association policy was necessary at this
time. Consensus was reached on the following Association priori­
ties for the Conference Committee deliberations:
i
i
l
Freeze the existing feedstock taxes.
Strongly oppose the Downey Amendment language.
Support a broad based funding component.
Discussed lnterassoclatlon coordination.
i
1
1
t
i
CMA 038565
r
2312
REPORT OF THE NOMINATING COMMITTEE
Reporting as Chairman of the Nominating Committee, Mr. Sella presented a
nomination to fill a vacancy on the Board of Directors caused by the resignation
of Donald F. Smith of the Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Corporation.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED:
That Howard M. Nelson, Senior Vice
President, Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical
Corporation, be elected as a Director through
ASSOCIATION ACTIVITIES
Treasurer's Report — Mr. Herman reported that the January Trea­
surer's Report will be mailed to the Board as soon as it is prepared. He also
reported projected results for the 1985/86 fiscal year which included revenues of
approximately $14,370,000, expenses of approximately $14,700,000 and use of
reserves of approximately $330,000, all very close to the authorized budget
levels. With respect to the budget for the 1986/87 fiscal year, requests for 1985
chemical sales data have been mailed and an early response was requested.
Administrative Changes — Mr. Herman presented for approval the
following three resolutions, relating to the Association's checking and payroll
accounts and to changes in procedures for authorizing amendments to the Associa­
tion's qualified benefit plans, for the reasons described in Exhibit H.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, the
following resolutions were VOTED:
RESOLVED: That NS&T Bank, National Association, Washington, DC
(the Bank), as a designated depository of this corporation be
and is hefeby requested, authorized and directed to honor all
checks, drafts or other orders for the payment of money drawn
in this corporation's name against account number 0210-44030
including those drawn to the individual order of any person or
persons whose names appear thereon as signer or signers
thereof without further inquiry, when bearing the signature
Raymond J. O'Bryan, Controller
Charles W. Van Vlack, Corporate Secretary
FURTHER RESOLVED: That Mr. Peter Agnew, Controller, is
deleted as an authorized signer against account number
0210-44030.
FURTHER RESOLVED: That all previous authorizations for the
signing and honoring of checks, drafts or other orders for the
payment of money, drawn on the said Bank, by this corporation
against account number 0210-44030 are hereby continued in full
force and effect as amplified and modified hereby.
CMA 038566
2313
FURTHER RESOLVED: That Mr. Charles W. Van Vlack, Corporate
Secretary, Is hereby requested, authorized and directed to
execute such documents as are required to implement the above
changes and within the intent of the approved recommendation.
RESOLVED: That NS&T Bank, National Association, Washington, DC
(the Bank), as a designated depository of this corporation be
and is hereby requested, authorized and directed to honor all
checks, drafts or other orders for the payment of money drawn
in this corporation's name against account number 0120-43099
including those drawn to the individual order of any person or
persons whose names appear thereon as signer or signers thereof
without further inquiry, when bearing or purporting to bear the
facsimile signature of ROBERT A. ROLAND, and said Bank shall be
entitled to honor and to charge this corporation for all such
checks, drafts or other orders for the payment of money,
regardless of by whom or by what means the actual or purported
facsimile signature or reasonable reproduction thereof may have
been affixed thereto including Macerated signature(s), if such
signature(s) resemble or are a reasonable reproduction of the
facsimile signature specimens certified or filed with said Bank
by the Secretary or other officer of this Corporation, and this
corporation does thereby undertake and agree to indemnify and
save harmless said Bank, of and from any and all loss, damage
and expense which it may suffer or incur by reason or as a
result of its reliance upon or action pursuant to the au­
thorization and direction herein contained; and
FURTHER RESOLVED: That all previous authorizations for the
signing and honoring of checks, drafts or other orders for the
payment of money, drawn on the said Bank, by this corporation
against account number 0120-43099 are hereby continued in full
force and effect as amplified hereby.
FURTHER RESOLVED: That Mr. Charles W. Van Vlack, Corporate
Secretary, is hereby requested, authorized and directed to
execute such documents as are required to implement the above
changes and within the intent of the approved recommendation.
RESOLVED: That the President of the Association is authorized
and directed, on advice of pension counsel, to amend the
Pension Plan of Chemical Manufacturers Association, Inc., and
the Chemical Manufacturers Association, Inc. Thrift/Deferred
Compensation Plan to the extent necessary to maintain the
qualification of the plans under Section 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
CMA 038567
2314
INTERNATIONAL TRADE MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS
Mr. Spllner presented a proposed position concerning United Stated
participation in a new round of multilateral trade negotiations (MTN). The
proposal reflected further committee deliberations as a result of the Executive
Committee's comments at the September 1985 meeting. As a result of Executive
Committee's concern for the wording of the portion of the proposal addressing
foreign policy concerns, a clarifying amendment was made.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, it was
VOTED: That the proposed position statement,
as amended by the Executive Committee and as
set forth in Exhibit I, be approved.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION ACT REAUTHORIZATION
Mr. Christman presented a proposed position concerning the
reauthorlzatlon of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded. It was
VOTED; That the proposed position statement,
as set forth In Exhibit J, be approved, with
the understanding that the portion of the
position statement addressing the creation
of a hazardous materials response fund be
restated In a more positive tone, while still
maintaining the criteria for support identi­
fied in the position.
DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
Mr. Christman presented the annual report of the Distribution Committee,
a summary of which Is attached as Exhibit K.
INCREASED COORDINATION OF INDUSTRY POLITICAL ACTIVITY
Messrs. Davis and Cole presented a proposal for Increasing coordination
of Industry political activity. Chairman Sella reported that this proposal had
been tabled by the Executive Committee until the March meeting, pending the
resolution of certain'legal concerns. In the discussion that followed, questions
were raised about any practical problems other associations might have experienced
Publication of a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
is expected in May 1986.
Testing requirements will be based on a finding of potentially
substantial human exposure.
EPA estimates that about 250,000 mechanics
are exposed to brake fluids where TGE concentrations range from 60-80% by
volume.
Proposed testing for each ether includes:
1) a 90-day rat dermal
study with satellite neurotoxicity testing; 2) dermal developmental
toxicity studies in rats and rabbits, including a study of behavioral
teratology in the rat; 3) Tier One mutagenicity testing and possibly
higher; 4) dermal rat and mouse oncogenicity studies (triggered by
positive mutagenicity); and, 5) a reproduction study in rats if signs of
reproductive organ toxicity are observed in the subchronic study.
The Glycol Ethers Panel is considering alternative testing proposals
to the EPA program.
The Panel will initiate a dermal limit test study on
the TGEs this month.
An in vitro skin absorption study on the compounds
is also planned.
Hydroquinone.
Results from a developmental toxicity study of rats
exposed to hydroquinone were submitted to EpA.
Testing was conducted at
Eastman Kodak's Health and Environmental Laboratories.
Ketones.
EPA's Office of Toxic Substances has issued a final rule
requiring testing of mesityl oxide under TSCA Section 4(a).
The Agency is
Page
49
CMA 038653
requiring a mutagenicity battery and 90-day subchronic study.
A positive
result in one of the mutagenicity tests would trigger higher-tiered
mutagenicity testing and an oncogenicity study.
All manufacturers,
including manufacturers of MO as a non-isolated intermediate, and
processors are subject to the test rule.
EPA also considers exposure to
MO in pesticide formulation to be a TSCA concern.
Concurrent with the publication of the final rule, EPA issued a
proposed rule on testing guidelines for the research required in the test
rule.
Comments are due to EPA by February 3, 1986.
The Ketones Panel will meet this month to review the final rule and
develop comments in response to the proposed test standards.
Lubricant Additives.
An organizational meeting of companies
interested in forming a Lubricant Additives Program was held at CMA on
October 22, 1985.
Attendees included members of an ad hoc group of
lubricant additives manufacturers who organized under CMA's Distribution
Committee to address forthcoming pollution control regulations by the
International Maritime Organization.
The group’s interests expanded to
discussion of the point where sponsorship of environmental effects testing
to support proper shipping classification of the additives.
CMA has
responded favorably to the request to establish a Special Program.
The
Lubricant Additives Panel will sponsor an aquatic toxicity testing program
and incorporate other activities of the ad hoc group.
Meetings of the
Panel and Environmental Research Task Group are scheduled this month.
Methylenedianlline.
The MDA Panel sponsored a one-day seminar for
MDA user representatives.
The seminar resulted in general support for
expanding the Panel to serve as the central coordination organization for
industry participation in the upcoming regulatory negotiations on MDA.
Several key trade associations with an Interest in MDA decided to join the
Panel;
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA); Suppliers of
Advanced Composite Materials (SACMA); and The Society of the Plastics
Industry (SPI).
The MDA Panel submitted comments in response to two Federal Register
notices regarding the establishment of a Federal Advisory Committee on
MDA.
The Panel submitted the nominations of Roger Daniels (Dow), Ron Lane
Fensterheim (CMA) to the Committee.
The Panel also
endorsed the nominations submitted by NEMA and SACMA.
The Panel informed OSHA that if all bf the industry nominees cannot
be accommodated, OSHA should not select the industry nominees to the
Advisory Committee.
Rather, OSHA should identify the number of seats to
be filled by MDA producers and users and allow the industry to determine
how the seats will be allocated.
Octylphenol.
CMA signed a contract with ABC Laboratories for conduct
Page
50
CMA 038654
of a chronic effects study of octylphenol in the rainbow trout.
The study
is being conducted as the last part of a TSCA Section 4 negotiated testing
agreement with EPA.
Phosgene.
The Phosgene Panel was given a private tour of the
Department of Energy's new Liquified Gaseous Fuels Spill Test Facility.
The facility, located about 75 miles from Las Vegas, has been established
on a user -fee basis to study the dynamics of accidental releases of
hazardous liquids.
The Panel is exploring the feasibility of sponsoring
research on air dispersion model validation and mitigation devices.
Phthalate Esters.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission released t>e
final report of its Chronic Hazard Advisory Panel (CHAP) on
di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) in children's products.
The CHAP report
concluded that while DEHP is an animal carcinogen, it is not genotoxic
(does not damage DMA) and the most likely mechanism of action involves a
threshold phenomenon.
In addition, the CHAP concluded that existing
exposure data are inadequate to permit an accurate estimate of risk.
Finally, the CHAP suggested that additional research is necessary to
accurately assess effects of DEHP on humans.
Following release of the report, the Commission met on December 19,
1985 to consider regulatory action of DEHP in children's products.
The
Toy Manufacturers of America proposed a voluntary standard on DEHP levels
in pacifiers.
The Commission agreed to pursue the voluntary standard and
meet again in March 1986 to review the progress of standard development.
The Phthalate Esters Panel will also participate in the standard
development process.
The Phthalate Esters Panel has formed a new work group, as part of
the Panel's FDA Task Group.
The new Exposure Work Group will develop a
program that will supplement FDA food analysis activities concerning
phthalates.
The Society of the Plastics Industry will actively
participate in this effort.
The FDA is analyzing milk and beer samples to
determine representative DEHP levels.
The Exposure work Group has
proposed a program that will test three food types:
milk, cheese and
meat.
Six locations in the United States will be selected, and six
products in each food type will be collected from every location.
DEHP
levels will be measured in each food sample.
FDA agreed to participate by
identifying the appropriate food brands and locations for collection.
If
FDA concurs totally with the proposal, testing should begin in February
1986.
The Phthalate Esters Panel filed comments on the TSCA Section 4
Proposed Test Rule on butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) which were prepared in
conjunction with the CMA Environmental Management Committee.
Since BBP is
also on EPA's Priority Pollutant List, the Agency is requiring under this
rule all the testing necessary to develop a Water Quality Criteria
Standard,
The Panel commented that the existing data base on BBP "may
Page
51
CMA 0386S6
present an unreasonable risk of injury." The Panel also feels that EPA
cannot use data needs for the Clean Water Act to justify testing under
Section 4 of TSCA.
Finally, the Panel's comments point out that the EPA
requirements for water Quality Criteria are excessive, and that the
standard test battery should be reduced to reflect the state-of-the-art in
environmental testing.
The Panel's comments were also presented to EPA at
a public meeting on the proposed rule on November 22.
The Panel and the
EMC will continue to work with the Water Office to develop a more
appropriate testing approach.
The Phthalate Esters Panel also provided EPA with comments on the
final report on "A Ranking System for 307(a) List of Priority Pollutants."
dated August 1985.
The report will be the basis for potential removal of
chemicals from EPA's Water Priority Pollutant List.
The industry has a
vital interest in the content and eventual application of the report since
any chemical can be listed or delisted as a priority pollutant.
EPA plans to announce its final procedures in May 1986.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls.
The Panel is continuing efforts towards
the development of a national standar4 for addressing PCB spills.
Various
meetings were held with representatives from the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association, the Edison Electric institute, the Natural
Resources Defense Council and the Environmental Defense Fund.
The Panel has begun developing its strategy for addressing EPA's
initiatives to bring PCB regulations into RCRA.
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals granted the Panel's motion to
intervene in the lawsuit brought against EPA's new regulations on the use
of PCBs in transformers.
The petition was granted despite EPA's motion
opposing the intervention.
Rubber Additives.
The Panel has agreed to conduct a comparative
metabolism study of mercaptobenzothiazole and mercaptobenzothiazole
disulfide.
The study will be conducted at Southern Research Institute.
The Panel is in the process of preparing comments in response to EPA's
proposed TSCA Section 4 test rule on MBT.
Titanium Dioxide.
The Panel last month met with officials from the
National cancer Institute to discuss the Institute's proposed
epidemiologic study of titanium dioxide workers.
NCI will address the
Panel's concerns in the report that it will submit to the Board of
Scientific Counselors for approval of the study.
The NCI Board will meet
in March 1986, and if the approval is granted, the study will begin by the
end of the year.
The TD industry plans to fully cooperate with NCI during
the conduct of the study.
Vinylidene Chloride.
The Panel attended an EPA seminar on VDC.
Page
52
CMA 038666
r
Cesare Maltoni discussed the toxicology studies performed on VDC.
Panel will continue to track Dr.
Maltoni'VDC study.
The
Water Additives.
The Panel was formed in late 1985 to evaluate the
National Sanitation Foundation's regulatory program for direct and
indirect potable water additives.
The Panel is preparing a position paper
on organic polyelectrolyte potable water additives.
The Panel will
participate in the January NSF meeting designed to inform the public on
how the regulations will be established.
Zinc Dialkyl Dithiophosphates.
The ZDDP Panel recently decided to
sunset after four years of conducting an active research and advocacy
program.
The ZDDP program was organized in 1981.
Participating companies
sponsored a three-phase research program designed to study the mutagenic
potential and possible reproductive effects associated with exposure to
this class of oil additives.
Seven producers and one user sponsored the
$400,000 program.
Research results from Panel-sponsored research were shared with EPA
and the Interagency Testing Committee (ITC).
These studies were deciding
factors in the ITC decision not to recommend ZDDPs for further health or
environmental effects testing.
III.
DEPARTMENTAL PROGRAM NOTES
Office of the President
International Affairs
Meetings with Foreign Trade Associations.
A continuing
discussion with the European Council of Chemical Manufacturers
Federations (CEFIC) and the Japan Chemical Industry Association
(JCIA) has resulted in agreement to meet with both JCIA and CEFIC
in the United States during the first six months of 1986.
These
meetings are reciprocal and will have a broad agenda, focussing on
differences between emerging U.S. and foreign systems of labeling to
identify toxic materials and safe workplace and handling procedures.
Government Relations Department
Grassroots Activities
The Grassroots Program continues to support the Washington based
lobbying efforts on Superfund reauthorizatibn.
Most of this work is being
Page
51
CMA 038667 _
dona through the network of constitutent contacts developed over the last
two years.
As Superfund legislation moved through the House and Senate, the
Grassroots Program continued to request letters and telephone calls from
constituents to legislators.
The message delivered to the legislators
continued to reflect the latest legislative developments.
The response to request for letters, telephone calls, and visits was
outstanding.
It appears that most companies made every effort to contact
a maximum number of Congressmen.
Follow-up letters thanking those Congressmen who supported CMA were
also requested.
Each Grassroot Manager was given the voting record on the
major amendments debate by the full House.
As needed, the Grassroots Program will lobby Congressmen and Senators
involved in the Conference Committee on Superfund.
In January a letter from the CMA Chairman of the Board George Sella
of American Cyanamid will be sent to each CMA member company requesting
increased and new participation in the Grassroots Program.
There will be a meeting of existing and new Grassroots Managers in
February 1986.
This meeting is designed to introduce all Grassroots
Managers to the Grassroots Program.
Background information on the new
Grassroots issues of the Clean Air Act and Groundwater will also be
discussed.
Following the February meeting, companies' Grassroots Managers will
be asked to identify constituents living in key congressional districts or
states.
These contacts will act as the coordinator of CMA Grassroots
activities in their area.
The Grassroots Program also plans to develop coalition efforts with
other chemical associations, other industry associations, and state
chemical councils wherever possible to lobby on the Clean Air Act and
Groundwater issues.
Technical Department
Hazardous Waste Testimony.
On January 31, 1986, in Albany New York,
Cox will present CMA's testimony on Hazardous Waste Management in the
chemical industry.
1986 Spills Conference.
Plans are almost completed for the 1986
spills conference, which will be held May 5-8 in St. Louis, MO.
Page
54
CMA 038668
Chemical Referral Center.
The Center began operations on schedule in
December.
Business is still slow but growing as more people learn that
the telephone lines are now open.
Office of the General Counsel
Insurance.
The Office has hosted a series of meetings with insurance
representatives of several member companies which has culminated in a
proposal to the Executive Committee that CjiA establish a Special Committee
on Insurance,
The two primary purposes of the Special Committee would be
to recommend to the Executive Committee CMA advocacy positions with the
government on insurance specific issues and to host a biannual open forum
for member insurance representatives to share information on the
availability of insurance to the industry.
The Office has also represented the Association at meetings of
various Washington based organizations on the related issues of insurance
availability and liability reform.
Government - Industry - Environmentalists Meeting on Alternatives to
Litigation.
The Office represented the Association at an October meeting
at the Ausable Club in New York, of senior lawyers and other officials of
EPA, the Department of Justice and several environmental organizations and
other individuals knowledgeable about alternatives to litigation.
This
first two-day, exploratory meeting, hosted in part by the Environmental
Law Institute, permitted the attendees to share information on the history
and disposition of their respective organizations to pursue alternatives
to litigation.
Specifically identified as an arena worth the attention of the respective
organizations was litigation alternatives in Superfund generally, and
Superfund enforcement specifically.
A second meeting is scheduled for
January at Belmont House in Maryland where topics for discussion will
include citizen enforcement of the environmental laws and potentials for
negotiated rulemaking.
Communications
A special task group of the Communications Committee met to discuss
the issue of Risk communication and the impact of risk perception on
public demands for government intervention.
The Community Information Programs Task Group conducted an interview
program with the National Association of County Agricultural Agents at its
annual meeting.
Five industry representatives from five member companies
taped 11 hours with 22 newspapers and 39 radio stations with an estimated
audience of more than one million.
The task group placed Charles M.
Page
55
CMA 038669
Kittrell, executive vice president, Phillips Petroleum, on the annual
meeting program.
r
At the National Association of Farm Broadcasters convention, 13
industry representatives from 11 companies were available for interviews.
Fifty-three broadcasters taped programs for an audience estimated at 100
million.
The CMA Issues Briefing Book is being revised to reflect such new
priorities as toxic air, groundwater, CAER/NCRIC and to eliminate some
dormant issues.
The book is distributed to more than 1,300 CMA members,
with many companies duplicating and distributing it in quantity.
i
i
i
CMA
Page
56
CMA 038660
EXHIBIT H
administrative recommendations
background
with the promotion of Mr. Raymond J. O'Bryan to the position of
Controller at CMA, it is necessary that Mr. O'Bryan's name replace that
of Mr. Agnew as an authorized signer on the Association's commercial
checking account.
The addition of Mr. Van Vlack, the Corporate
Secretary, as a fourth authorized signer should facilitate processing
and reviewing disbursements while maintaining good internal control.
RECOMMENDATION
That the Association's commercial checking account at National
Savings and Trust (No. 0210-44030) may be drawn on by check signed by
any two of the following:
Robert A. Roland, President; Gary C.
Herrman, Vice President-Treasurer; Charles W. Van Vlack, Corporate
Secretary; or Raymond J. O'Bryan, Controller.
The facsimile signature
of Robert A. Roland may be used to countersign checks drawn by, Robert
A. Roland, Gary C. Herrman, Charles W. Van Vlack or Raymond J. O'Bryan
(not to exceed $10,000 per check).
ACTION REQUESTED
Approval of Recommendation and Resolution A.
BACKGROUND
The current procedures requiring the manual signature of the
President or Treasurer for disbursements from the Association's imprest
payroll account are burdensome and time consuming.
Adequate control
already exists to permit use of a facsimile signature for such
disbursements.
RECOMMENDATION
That the Association's payroll checking account at National
Savings and Trust (NO. 0120-43099) may be drawn on only by check signed
by one of the following:
Robert A. Roland, President; Gary C. Herrman,
vice President-Treasurer; or Robert A. Roland/facsimile.
ACTION REQUESTED
Approval of recommendation and Resolution B.
BACKGROUND
Through recently passed legislation, i.e., the Tax Equity and
Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 (TEFRA), the Deficit Reduction Act
(DEFRA), and the Retirement Equity Act (REA), congress has imposed
numerous additional requirements for continued tax qualification of
pension and profit-sharing plans.
The IRS has not yet issued regu­
lations implementing all th new legislation and regulations that have
been issued have not yet been finalized,
congress also may enact new
CMA 038661
f
2
legislation changing the requirements for maintenance of tax qualified
status.
Because it is as yet unclear what requirements must be met in
order to maintain tax-qualified status under the new tax laws, irs
may request additional amendments to the Plans during the determination
letter process.
Additional amendments may also be needed to comply
with any future changes in the tax laws.
Accordingly, an expeditious
method of amending the 401(h) Plan and the Pension Plan to maintain tax
qualified status is needed.
At its October 18, 1985 meeting, the CMA Employee Benefits
Committee directed staff and pension counsel to prepare a resolution
for Board approval to expand the authority of the President to make
such changes.
RECOMMENDATION
That the President be granted authority, on advice of pension
counsel, to authorized amendments to CMA's qualified plans to the
1
extent necessary to maintain their qualified status.
Such amendments
would be subsequently, reported to the Employee Benefits Committee and
Board for Review.
I
ACTION REQUESTED
Approval of Recommendation and Resolution C.
Attachments
CMA
CMA 038662
EXHIBIT I
PROPOSED MTN POSITION
BACKGROUND
The Administration has moved strongly to counter Congressional
anger about import competition and foreign markets closed to U.S.
exports.
The President proposed on September 23 a long list of things
he will do administratively and requests he will make of the Congress
for legislation.
Among the proposals will be a request for
authorization of a new round of multilateral trade negotiations
(MTN's) under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Important sections of the business conanunity and the farmers have
been pressuring the Administration for such broad scale bargaining for
several years.
It is essential, they believe, to resolve serious
trade problems they have on a worldwide basis.
In anticipation of
this, the President's Trade Representative has strongly promoted a new
MTN (like the Kennedy Round of the 60's and Tokyo round of the 70's)
with other countries.
It now appears that enough GATT members agree
and the President needs to prove his commitment by obtaining
Congressional approval to proceed.
Key bills in the Senate and House
have an MTN authorization provision.
They will be taken up early in
1986.
RECOMMENDATION
The CMA International Trade Consnittee seeks to emphasize three
issues in a new MTN:
intellectual property rights investment policy
and tariff cutting.
With a position already approved by the Board on
the first two issues, approval of a tariff cutting policy was
requested the Board on September 10.
The proposal was tabled, without
prejudice, to allow the ITC to revise it after reviewing comments by
Board members.
The resulting, proposed policy and statement of principles is
attached.
It calls for a sound U.S.
negotiating policy, a better
GATT dispute settlement procedure, limited tariff cutting, and
resolution of investment and intellectual property rights difficulties
in other countries.
A copy of the full, recosnended ITC policy is a attached.
ACTION REQUIRED - Approval of attached position.
CMA
CMA 038663
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
CONCERNING
UNITED STATES PARTICIPATION IN A
NEW ROUND OF MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS (MTN)
UNDER THE GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE (GATT)
In 1986, the United States and other GATT signatories are expected to
enter into a new Round of MTN in an effort to further expand world
trade.
CMA believes the new Round should address a number of issues which are
crucial to the long range competitive position of the U.S. chemical
industry.
The emphasis should not be on simply cutting tariffs, but
rather on efforts to eliminate existing trade barriers.
These trade
barriers include foreign market access, certain tariffs, trade
distorting foreign investment practices, ineffective protection of
intellectual property rights, and the lack of an effective
international discipline for settling disputes related to
international trading rules.
The attached statement of principles for U.S. participation in the
new Round addresses each of these issues.
CMA 038664
Attachment
CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES
CONCERNING
UNITED STATES PARTICIPATION IN A NEW ROUND
OF MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS (MTN)
UNDER THE GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE (GATT)
U.S. NEGOTIATING POLICY
The new round of MTN must foster the development of sound trading and
investment practices.
U.S. participation in the MTN should include
as priority objectives the elimination of trade distorting practices
and the expansion of U.S. export opportunities.
The reduction of
U.S. tariff rates should not be among the primary U.S. negotiating
objectives for a new MTN,'
The international trade interests of the United States should be given
consideration at least equal to foreign policy concerns in negotiating
agreements during the MTN.
Foreign policy concerns* other than those
of a national security nature, should not effect decisions on U.S.
trade policy.
Adequate and timely opportunities should be provided for U.S.
chemical industry input and review during the process of establishing
negotiating objectives as well as during the negotiations themselves.
Ample opportunity should also be provided for the private sector to
comment, and for Congress to debate and amend any tentative agreements
made in the negotiating process, before the negotiated agreements are
submitted to the Congress for final’approval.
The MTN authority should not restrict the President from conducting
separate trade negotiations with other countries during the MTN.
In
addition, the Administration should not impair the implementation and
timely and aggressive resolution of actions brought under U.S. trade
remedy laws during the MTN.
GATT DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES
GATT dispute settlement procedures must be improved to include
binding, time-certain requirements for the resolution of disagreements
on issues covered by GATT rules.
Resolution of disputes already taken
to GATT should be the first step in this process.
ft
CMA 038665
FOREIGN MARKET ACCESS
GATT signatory countries should be required to grant U.5. exporters
fair access to their markets without unreasonable barriers or
conditions, in exchange for their retaining relatively free access to
TARIFF NEGOTIATIONS
i
Although the emphasis of a new Round should not be on tariff cutting,
the reduction or even elimination of tariffs on certain chemical
products may be appropriate, while reductions of tariffs on certain
other chemical products may impose an undue burden on U.S.
manufacturers.
Any reductions which are proposed should, therefore,
be well-justified.
In the interest of reaching a balanced and equitable trade and tariff
agreement, the United States should negotiate changes in chemical
tariffs only on the basis of request lists, rather than imposing
formula cuts across the board, or automatically eliminating tariffs
below certain levels.
Also, any U.S. plan to reduce or eliminate chemical tariffs should
include provisions enabling affected industries to obtain exceptions
for import sensitive products.
In addition, reduction or elimination of chemical tariffs should not
be offered in exchange for concessions in non-chemical sectors.
These conditions should be included in any legislation authorizing
U.S. participation in the MTN, and specifically in legislative
language providing tariff negotiating authority for a new MTN Round.
FOREIGN INVESTMENT PRACTICES
A GATT code on foreign investment should be negotiated.
Such a code
should be based on national treatment for foreign investments and
should ensure the elimination or substantial reduction of
trade-distorting foreign investment practices, including!
o
prohibitions or restrictions on foreign investment
in certain economic sectors, such as chemicals
i
CMA 038666
o
screening of foreign investment proposals by
government agencies and limitations on the amounts
and percentages of equity that can be owned by
foreigners
o
performance requirements, including mandated local
purchase of equipment, supplies and services, and the
share of production which must be dedicated to exports
o
limitations on royalties and licensing
o
limitations on repatriation of earnings.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
U.S. negotiators should seek binding cosnitments from foreign
governments not to use inadequate intellectual property laws to
distort international trade.
As part of these commitments, agreements
should be negotiated not only to improve the protection afforded
patents, trademarks and copyrights, but also to improve the protection
afforded in practice to proprietary or confidential information and
trade secrets so that foreign nationals operating in other countries
may exercise and obtain enforcement of their intellectual property
rights in those countries.
CMA 038667
EXHIBIT J
CMA POSITION ON THE
reauthorization
op
the
hazardous
materials
TRANSPORTATION ACT
problem
The federal government has been losing the strong central authority
to regulate the movement of hazardous materials*
An increasing
number of state and local rules now restrict the free flow of these
commodities.
Such restrictions are manifested in many different
forms, including:
permits, routing, prenotification, equipment
specifications, driver licensing and hazard identification.
In exchange for giving up their right to impose local fees to support state
and local response capabilities to transportation emergencies in­
volving hazardous materials and other operation requirements, state
and local governments are demanding funding to improve their response
to transportation incidents involving hazardous materials.
Qbj active
Strengthen the HMTA to give DOT the ability to quickly review and rule
on local and state ordinances that impede the interstate movement
of goods*
Improve the ability of communities to plan for and
respond to hazardous materials transportation emergencies,
such
improvements should not be funded with a new •transportation
superfund", but rather should take into account private initiatives
such as NCRIC and CAER to respond to state and local needs.
Background
The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA) was originally
passed in 1974, and reauthorized in l$78 and again in 1982.
In the
last round of hearings on the HMTA reauthorisation, industry pressed
for national uniformity of regulations.
This was strongly opposed by
representatives of state and local government unless industry agreed
to address their concerns about local emergency response
capabilities.As a result. Congress refused to take a substantive
position addressing industry's concerns, or those of state/local
government*
Following the 1982 hearings a coalition of industry and
state and local representatives was formed to forge consensus
modifications to the HMTA that preserve the industry's interest in the
free flow of commodities between states and that address the needs of
state/local jurisdictions to respond adequately to hazardous materials
emergencies*
Unfortunately this Coalition adopted the position that a
special fund based on an industry tax should be included in the HMTA
t
pay for training and equipment for state/ local hazardous materials
•a rgency response teams.
The fund was estimated at $20 million
CMA 038668
dollars but chat is unrealistically low if equipment is included in
the fund objectives,
we are concerned that the new taxes would also
be directed at the "deep pockets" rather than the whole hazardous
materials transportation eoanunity*
We are also concerned that soae
states or localities would refuse to accept aoney froa a federal fund
and elect to initiate their own tax on industry.
Currently, the fund concept is supported by this "Uniformity
Coalition", the National Hazardous Materials Technical Advisory
Coaaittee (an advisory coaaittee to DOT), the API, the Aaerican
Trucking Association , the National Association of Towns and Town­
ships and the National Conference of State Legislatures.
The position
taken by shipper and carrier supporters is that a "saall federal
fund" would be better than sany state and local fees.
t
Recommendations
j
t
support reauthorization of the HMTA in this Congress.
The re­
authorization should strengthen the authority of DOT in preempting
local and state ordinances that impede the flow of hazardous
materials through fees, bans, prenotifieation, or unreasonable routing
restrictions.
At the same time we would support efforts to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of the federal government in
providing training for local agencies to respond to hazardous
materials emergencies*
The federal program should recognize the
contribution of voluntary industry efforts.
Oppose the institution of another fund to provide training and
equipment for emergency responders on the basis that the training
is generally available and could be readily augmented by federal
programs in cooperation with expanded industry efforts, if necessary.
Zquipment needs are being net by industry through direct cooperation
in the establishment of local emergency response contingency plans
and mutual aid programs such as CMA's CHZMNZT.
See Attachment I for specific recommendations.
See Attachment XI through IV for additional background.
Action Required
Approval of recommendation
CMA
CMA 038669
1
ATTACHMENT I
CMA POSITION ON ISSUES
RELATIVE TO THE REAUTHORIZATION OF HMTA
There are generally twelve area* baing considered by tha National
Hazardous Matarials Transportation Advisory Council (an advisory
coasittat to DOT), tha Offica of Technology Assessment, and tha
Hazardous Materials Coalition for amending tha Hazardous Matarials
Transportation Act,
These twelve areas and tha recommended direction
CMA should take on them are as follows:
Hazardous Materials Regulations Must Be Uniform
CMA supports the recommendation that the regulations
governing the transportation of hazardous materials
should be nationally uniform.
Differing regulations
at tha federal, state and local levels for such
transportation are counterproductive to the safe
movement of hazardous materials.
While the existing language of the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act clearly authorizes the Secretary of
Transportation to preempt inconsistent state and local
regulations, the process for obtaining such a ruling
has not worked to the satisfaction of government, in­
dustry or the public.
DOT 'inconsistency rulings”
should not be overturned by courts unless found to be
arbitrary and capricious.
DOT should consider both the
'inconsistency* criteria and the 'nonpreemption* criteria
in a single ruling.
These changes to the inconsistency
process will reduce the time and expense associated with
determining the lawfulness of state and local restrictions,
to the benefit of DOT, states, localities, industry and
ultimately to the benefit of safety.
CMA agrees with the recommendation that Congress should
clearly define the specific roles of federal, state and
local governments regarding the development of hazardous
materials transportation regulations.
In an effort to
achieve a nationally uniform regulatory scheme the federal
government, through DOT, should be solely responsible for
promulgating hazardous materials transportation regulations
after taking into consideration the input of affected
parties, including industry and other governmental agencies.
State and local regulations should only be promulgated in
areas DOT has not addressed and where states and localities
CMA 038670
have a unique and legitimate need to regulate.
CMA further
believes that state and local government should have the
primary responsibility for enforcing these national
hazardous materials transportation regulations.
(2) Data Base and Regional Flow patterns
CMA agrees with the recommendation that a data base sh uld
be established to determine the regional flow patterns for
hazardous materials.
He further agree that such information
should be limited to what is necessary for determining the
appropriate level and placement of emergency response train­
ing and equipment.
It is important that the information re­
quired for the development of this data base is limited to
those hazard classes and materials that have the greatest
potential for causing problems.
This will eliminate, the
likelihood that government will be saturated with super­
fluous information, and will focus the nation's emergency,
response capabilities to those areas where they are
needed most.
To the extent possible, the party most readily able to
supply the information (whether shipper, carrier, DOT or
state/local authorities) should be the party required to
supply it.
Also, existing sources of information and
sampling techniques (e.g., DOT incident reports, waybill
sample) should be considered before establishing new or
additional Information requirements*
Finally, commercially sensitive information should not
be required.
(3) National Emergency Response Awareness Program
Hhile CMA wholeheartedly agrees that the public must
be aware of their role when an accident occurs involving
hazardous materials, we further believe that there should
be a shared government/industry responsibility to let the
public know what safeguards and mechanisms currently exist
to minimise the potential for problems associated with the
transportation of hazardous materials*
The actual involve­
ment of industry in this area, which is extremely good,
should be conveyed as a part of this public awareness
campaign.
(4) Guidelines for Hazardous Materials Incident Planning,
Training and Equipment
CMA 038671
3
CMA it committed to the development of contingency plans
for responding to eaergencies involving hazardous aaterials.
These plans should eaanate at the local level by bringing
together the resources of eaergeney response officials,
federal, state and local governments, and industry.
CMA
and its aeabership have formally embarked on two major
programs that are designed to meet this objective.
These
programs are the Community Awareness snd Emergency Response
Program (CAER) and the National Chemical Response and
Information Center (NCRIC).
Prom an industry perspective, chemical manufacturers have
been very progressive in assisting emergency response
officials in the development of contingency plans and in
making detailed support information and equipment readily
available.
We intend to continue of efforts in this area,
and we encourage other industries associated with the
movement of hazardous materials to embark on similar safety
initiatives.
Registration program
CMA would not object if DOT, for good cause, decided to
exercise its current statutory authority to establish a
registration program for shippers and carriers of hazardous
materials, as well as manufacturers of containers for
hazardous aaterials.
In determining the need for a regis­
tration program, DOT should focus its emphasis on product
flow identification and enforcement.
As explained below,
a registration program should not be used for the collection
of funds for an Emergency Response Fund.
Establish A Fund
CMA cannot endorse the establishment of a federal emergency
response fund without a clearer understanding of the need
for a fund, the amounts involved, how the fund would be
administered, and how the effectiveness of the fund would
be measured.
CMA does not believe that the needs of state and local
emergency responders have been adequately assessed in terms
of training and equipment*
Dnder issue (2), Data Base and
Regional Flow patterns, DOT may develop Information per­
taining to the movement of hazardous materials.
This
information on where hazardous aaterials are moving should
then be compared to where public and private emergency
response capabilities exist.
Only then can an objective
assessment be made of the needs of the eaergeney response
CMA 038672
coaaunity.
s imply Bak ing aonty available
govtrmant wi thout an adequate aseeisaent
the nation is not an a ppropriate solution
a coordinated national eaergency plan for
aattriali acc idants *
froa the federal
of the needs of
to developing
hazardous
Further, over 300 states and localities currently have
eaergency response capabilities for hazardous aaterials
spills.
Existing state and local eaergency response
prograas, coupled with voluntary industry assistance,
should be considered by DOT in assessing the overall needs
of the nation in teras of eaergency response assistance.
Pre-notification
CNA does not support the est«blishaent of shipaent-by■hipaent pre-notification requireaents for hazardous
aaterials at the state or local level.
State and local
shipaent-by-shipaent pre-notification requireaents are
counterproductive to the safe transportation of hazardous
aaterials.
They can cause unnecessary delays and aassive
paperwork subaissions that are of questionable value to
anyone.
CNA would not object to prior notification to a
central state authority of generic cheaical flow, although
we believe such notification should not be necessary sore
often than once every twelve aonths.
Further, auch of
this inforaation would have to be supplied by transporters
since they select the routes that are being used based on
their overall shipper/eonsignee geographic distribution.
(8) Local Perait,
Registration and Licensing Fee
As discussed in itea 6, CNA does not believe the need for
an Eaergency Response .fund has been deaonstrated•
As with
the federal eaergency response fund, CNA believes that local
perait, registration and licensing fees should not be peraitted unless unique local circuastances justify their need.
In the assessaent of the need for these local fees, industry
expertise and resources should be accounted for.
Money for enforeeaent of hazardous aaterials regulations
is currently available froa the federal governaent to those
states that have adopted the federal regulations.
CNA
supports this funding approach for enforeeaent.
{$) State and Local Sovernaents Adopt and Enforce Federal
Hazardous Materials Regulations
CMA 038673
5
CHA supports the adoption and anforeaaant of tha fadaral
hazardous materials regulations by stats and local govern­
ments.
We recognize that the federal government does not
have the necessary resources and personnel to adequately
police the hazardous materials shipping and transportation
communities.
Therefore, in order to enhance the safe
transportation of these products, cma believes it is
essential for state and local enforcement personnel to
ensure industry compliance with the national regulatory
scheme.
Good Samaritan Law
CMA supports the recommendation that all states should enact
Good Samaritan legislation to protect the liabilities of
those responding to emergencies involving hazardous
materials.
Enactment of such legislation is essential to
enhance industry response to emergencies involving
hazardous materials.
(11) Technical Assistance
In The Industry
The chemical industry is committed to providing technical
assistance to federal, state and local officials that are
responsible for protecting the welfare of the public.
Programs such as CMA's Community Awareness and Emergency
Response (CAER) and the Rational Chemical Response and
Information Center (NCRIC) are prime examples of this
commitment.
We believe these programs should limit the
need for establishing duplicative federal state and local
emergency response initiatives.
We welcome other sectors
of the hazardous materials transportation community to
contribute their ideas and efforts in building upon these
programs and communicating their availability.
Right To Know
CMA agrees that it is industry's responsibility to provide
product specific Information to emergency response personnel
so they can handle emergencies involving hazardous materials
in a timely and appropriate manner.
CMA currently provides
much of this information through its CHEMTREC system, and
subsequent contact with individual shippers. In addition,
the DOT Emergency Response Guidebook is a valuable source
for initial responders.
Regarding the distribution of general health and safety
Information about chemicals, it is CMA's policy that
member companies will furnish to a central state
CMA 038674
authority Macarial Safety Data Sheets for each product
manufactured in the state.
In addition, our members are
committed to furnishing copies of MSDSs to individuals,
such as transporters, upon request.
Further, CMA's new
Chemical Referral Center will enable callers to obtain
chronic health information from the manufacturer of the
product in question.
With respect to transportation, CNA believes that DOT
should mandate that Emergency Response Guidebooks be
kept at terminals to inform employees about the acute
health hazards associated with the chemicals they are
handling.
In the unlikely event that an employee is
exposed to a chemical that is being transported, contact
with the appropriate shipper or CMA Chemical Referral
Center will produce the necessary chronic health hazard
information.
CMA also would not object to the Guidebook
being carried in each truck cab and rail engine.
Exposure
to hazardous materials in-transit is rare, however, if a
leak should occur acute health hazard information is
essential.
CMA 038675
EXHIBIT K
DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
1984-85
Oral
Report
Christman,
THE DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
DECEMBER IN
HAS
INDIA HAVE
THE
LED TO A
Chairman
1986
HAD AN EXCEPTIONALLY BUSY,
DURING
1985.
AS
WITH THE
EVENTS WHICH TOOK
PLACE
INCREASE
OUR OPERATIONS.
REST COMFORTABLY WITH MAINTAINING THE
THE SAFETY
CMA Board
SIGNIFICANT
TERNAL AND EXTERNAL SCRUTINY OF
WE
REWARDING YEAR,
REST OF THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY,
the
Committee
January
YET OVERWHELMINGLY
to
STATUS
NO
IN BOTH
LONGER COULD
QUO.
EVEN THOUGH
RECORD FOR THE TRANSPORTATION OF CHEMICALS
EXTREMELY GOOD,
LAST
HAS
BEEN
INDUSTRY MUST CONSTANTLY EXPEND A GREAT DEAL OF
EFFORT TO ENSURE THAT PROBLEMS
ARE KEPT UNDER CONTROL.
WE ARE NOT SO NAIVE TO SUGGEST THAT ACCIDENTS
TATION WILL NOT OCCUR.
ENVIRONMENT PRESENTS
THE VERY NATURE OF
THE TRANSPORTATION
MANY POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
THE DIRECT CONTROL OF OUR REPRESENTATIVES.
NITUDE OF AN ACCIDENT,
IN TRANSPOR­
THAT ARE
NOT UNDER
TO MINIMIZE THE MAG­
THE DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE AND STAFF HAVE
GONE TO GREAT LENGTHS TO IMPLEMENT THE COMPONENTS OF
THE NATIONAL
CHEMICAL RESPONSE AND INFORMATION CENTER.
NCRIC,
AS
YOU KNOW,
IS
DESIGNED TO PROVIDE
AND THE PUBLIC AS A WHOLE WITH
PROGRAM*
TITLED CHEMNET;
TRAINING.
THERE ARE FOUR KEY
AN EXPANDED CHEMTREC;
THE CHEMICAL
RESPONDERS
INFORMATION ABOUT CHEMICALS TO
SATISFY THEIR RESPECTIVE NEEDS.
THE NCRIC
EMERGENCY
ELEMENTS
A MUTUAL AID
REFERRAL CENTER;
TO
PROGRAM
AND FIRST RESPONDER
I AM PLEASED TO ANNOUNCE THAT AS WE PROMISED LAST
JANUARY ALL ELEMENTS OF THIS
PROGRAM BECAME OPERATIONAL IN
1985.
CHEMTREC HAS BEEN MODERNIZED WITH A NEW COMPUTER SYSTEM THAT
WILL SPEED THE PROCESSING OF EMERGENCY INFORMATION,
ABLE MEMBER COMPANIES AND
TO
RESPONSE
RECEIVE A HARD COPY PRINTOUT OF
THE ACTIVITY AT CHEMTREC CONTINUES
RECEIVED
IN
1985,
OF WHICH 6,898
PERSONNEL AT AN ACCIDENT SCENE
APPROPRIATE RESPONSE
TO EXPAND WITH
DATA.
31,394
CALLS
RELATED TO EMERGENCIES.
THIS
LARGE AMOUNT OF USAGE DEMONSTRATES
THAT CHEMTREC
THE MOST RESPECTED AND WELL REGARDED CMA EFFORTS
AND EMERGENCY
AND WILL EN­
REMAINS ONE OF
BY THE
PUBLIC
RESPONSE ORGANIZATIONS.
CMA 038676
2
CHEMNET,
59
3
CMA
MEMBERS
COMMERCIAL
HAVE
THE
THE CHEMICAL
INDUSTRY'S
PARTICIPATING.
EMERGENCY
ENTIRE
THESE COMPANIES
RESPONSE
IDENTIFIED A TOTAL OF
MUTUAL AID SYSTEM,
121
COMPANIES
COMBINED WITH THE
UNDER CONTRACT TO CMA
RESPONSE TEAMS
UNITED STATES THAT CAN
NOW HAS
COVERING VIRTUALLY
RESPOND TO CHEMICAL TRANSPORTA­
TION ACCIDENTS.
THE CHEMICAL REFERRAL CENTER,
SPOND TO NON-EMERGENCY
INFORMATION ON OVER
PANIES,
INQUIRIES
25.000
WHICH
THE
ABOUT CHEMICALS,
CHEMICALS
WHELMING SUCCESS.
TO
CURRENTLY
HAS
18,875
CONTACTS
INFORMATION ABOUT SPECIFIC
FIRST RESPONDER TRAINING,
HAS
THE'DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE HAS
A LENDING LIBRARY OF TRAINING FILMS
UP
FROM 119 PARTICIPATING COM­
FINAL COMPONENT OF THE NATIONAL CHEMICAL
INFORMATION CENTER,
TION,
BEEN SET
CALLERS ARE DIRECTED TO APPROPRIATE COMPANY
GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY
BY
HAS
PRODUCTS.
RESPONSE AND
BEEN AN OVER­
PUT TOGETHER
WHICH HAVE ALREADY BEEN VIEWED
MEMBERS OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMMUNITY.
A CMA TRAINING FILM ENTITLED
FOR
IN ADDI­
"FIRST ON THE SCENE"
COMPLETED AND IS RECEIVING VERY HIGH
REVIEWS
HAS BEEN
FROM THE TECHNICAL
COMMUNITY.
WHILE
THESE AND OTHER SAFETY RELATED PROGRAMS
GREAT DEAL OF OUR MEMBER'S
HAS ALSO BEEN VERY ACTIVELY
POSTURE OF
ATTENTION,
RECEIVED A
THE DISTRIBUTION COMMITTEE
INVOLVED IN ENHANCING THE
ECONOMIC
THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY.
IN THE RAIL TRANSPORTATION AREA THREE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS
OCCURED.
WITH THE
THE
CMA HAS SUCCESSFULLY
HAVE
NEGOTIATED AN ATTRACTIVE AGREEMENT
RAILROADS TO PROVIDE A FAIR RETURN TO TANK CAR OWNERS
RAILROADS
USE OF THESE VEHICLES.
TO ALL TANK CAR OWNERS
IS SOME
$555
SUCCESSFUL IN GETTING THE RAILROADS
THE ICC TO
INVESTIGATE ANY
THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF
MILLION ANNUALLY.
FOR
RETURN
CMA WAS ALSO
TO AGREE ON A MECHANISM FOR
DEVIATIONS BY THE RAILROADS
ON THE
NATIONAL ALLOWANCE SYSTEM.
IN THE
ROLE
SECOND MAJOR RAIL DEVELOPMENT,
IN OBTAINING A FAVORABLE
COMMISSION ON
RULING FROM THE
RAIL-TO-RAIL COMPETITIVE ACCESS
CHEMICAL PLANTS CAPTIVE
LISHED
CMA PLAYED A PRINCIPLE
TO A SINGLE
RAILROAD,
INTERSTATE COMMERCE
ISSUES.
WITH
THESE NEWLY
MANY
PUB­
RULES WILL PROVE VERY BENEFICIAL IN YOUR ABILITY TO NEGOTIATE
COMPETITIVE
RAIL TRANSPORTATION
RATES.
CMA 038677
EXHIBIT L
Cobhunications Committee Report
to CMA Board
January 28, 1986
A year ago when John Huasey of Monsanto gave the coaalttee's
report, there wasn't a person in this rooa — or In this industry
— who wasn't shocked by the tragedy that occurred in India in
December of 1984.
To an Industry already under public scrutiny, this shock added
the eleaents of plant safety and operating coapetence to the
public's concerns about us.
To deteraine the extent of the
public's feelings about cheaicals, Caabridge Reports recently
conducted a national opinion survey.
The results of that survey were not encouraging.
Without going into all the details, the public's view of the
cheaical Industry was fairly straightforward:
We are perceived
as the nuaber one environaental risk to society and the nuaber
Report by M. E. Thoapson, Aaoco Cheaicals Coapany, to CMA Board
of Directors, January 28, 1986
2
two safety risk, with the nuclear power Industry ranked as number
one.
More than 70 percent of those questioned feel that a
Bhopal-type accident Is likely to happen In the U.S.
By
overwhelming majorities, the public supports legislation to
create rlght-to-know laws, mandatory emergency planning, and
buffer zones around chemical plants.
Perhaps one of the more disturbing findings was that 64 percent
of those polled aren't so sure that the benefits they get from
chemicals are worth the risk.
And about 60 percent of the public
wants more regulation of the chemical Industry even if such
regulation results in higher prices for consumer products.
Further, It will cone as no surprise to you that we rank last
among basic Industries in terms of public favorablllty — below
even the nuclear power and alcohol Industries.
However, not everything the Cambridge survey found out was
negative.
As an example, the public Is of mixed emotions as to the role
that perceived corporate greed plays In our environmental
performance.
About 51 percent felt that we're Just out to make a
buck regardless of the environmental consequences.
Yet 42
percent disagreed with that statement.
CMA 038679
3 The beet news is that three quarters of the public feels that the
chemical industry is making at least soae effort to ensure that a
Bhopal-type accident doesn't happen in the U.S.
While that's
hardly great news, it does show that the public is at least
somewhat aware of our excellent safety record and the things
we're doing to improve it even further.
We also learned that while the public is concerned about spills
and leaks and accidents, they feel that It is the long-term
health effects that are most important.
So as we take steps to
ensure against accidents and crises, we should not lose track of
the larger issue — namely, that the public is very concerned
about chronic health effects from exposure and use of chemicals.
In implementing a strategy to rebuild our reputation, we should
realize that there Is little opportunity to do something dramatic
to showcase our efforts.
As H. Clark said in Washington
recently, "We haven't been caught doing good.”
There Is little
we can do of a positive nature that will make page one or the
evening news.
And that's probably good.
With our luck, we'd
have Dan Rather signing off with "and this is the 10th straight
day without a major chemical mishap."
Instead, we must rebuild our reputation the slow way — with a
failsafe operating and safety performance, sincere attention to
the public's concerns, and a credible communications effort.
other words, do good and THEN tell about it.
In
CMA 038680
;oring our reputation, we need a goal.
On a public
Idenee scale of t to TO, it's unlikely that we'll achieve the
/r 8 level that we enjoyed in the 50s and 60s, when we were
.'egarded as being the source of alracle products.
reachable target would be a 4 or a 5 *- that gray aiddle ground
of public tolerance that will perait us to operate our businesses
in a reasonable Banner.
The public always will be concerned
about our industry and our products.
that.
We'll have to live with
Our goal should be to answer the public's fears about us
so that their reasonable concern doesn’t translate into extreme
actions
In responding to Bhopal, the industry wifely steered clear of
progress that would be seen aerely as public relations gestures.
By creating the CAER and MCRIC prograas, CMA has given the
Industry an activist response that involves an operating
coaaitaent by line aanageaent.
These prograas are comprehensive
and directed four-square at the public's aajor concerns about the
Industry.
Mot coincidentally, they also provide an excellent
communications opportunity at the local and state level that we
aust use to our advantage.
The current state of the industry's aedla relations and
cosaunications efforts is one of those good news/bad news
situations.
The good news is that the Intense aedia attention to
r
- 5 our business has enabled us to establish reasonably good
relationships with hundreds of media people.
to these people as never before.
We now have access
The bad news, of course, is
that It took some tragic events to bring this about.
When I say Intense media attention, I mean that literally.
The
number of media calls fielded by CMA in 1985 reached 10,000.
That's an 11 percent percent Jump from 1984.
At Amoco we
received 26 percent more media calls about our chemicals business
in 1984-85 than in 1982-83.
I'm sure that each of your companies
would report similar results.
Despite this media attention and despite the negative news items
of 1985, a professional view is that our treatment by the media
could have been a lot worse.
While each member of the
communications committee can recall a few horror stories from
1985, we agree that, on balance, the Industry received fair
treatment.
This occurred as a natural result of increased
personal contact between the media and the members of our
industry.
In many instances, our open and candid response during
these negative incidents helped establish credibility with the
media and showed our concern and our reasonableness.
As a result, we have created relationships with some media people
that will be a major communications asset for us In the future.
CMA 038682
Speaking of wita, our future communications activities will
benefit from the success of the CMA Superfund editorial contact
program.
This program, in which a number of you participated,
was a major communications achievement.
It succeeded because CMA
adopted a responsible and activist position on Superfund and took
that position on the road with great persistence and
thoroughness.
The results — In terms of editorials favorable to
CMA's position — were nothing short of incredible.
The
editorial contact program also proved once again that the
industry's greatest communications assets are the people in this
room and your peers in other CMA member companies.
To those in
the media, you ARE the chemical industry.
So, to answer the question "are things getting better with the
media?", I would have to answer a qualified yes.
established contacts and credibility.
tfe have
Opportunities exist for
substantially improved media coverage of our industry in the
future.
Looking to that future, the communications committee is convinced
that CMA's communications objectives will be best achieved by
concentrating on solving current problems with current resources.
While we are concerned about the industry's long-range goals, we
feel that we can accomplish many of those goals through properly
directed attention to today's problems.
CMA 038683
- 7 s a result, we will concentrate on the following areas In the
near future:
We will focus our support on the CAER/NCRIC programs, especially
now that many of the emergency plans have been prepared and are
ready to take to the public.
Our October open meeting was a CAER .
communications seminar that was very well attended.
We will
continue to recruit individual companies to actively support CAER
communications and we will work with CMA staff and the state
chemical councils in their CAER efforts.
We have set up a pilot program for communications committee
members to help Improve state chemical council communications
programs.
Three states are in our first batch that will begin
this year.
If successful, this approach could be expanded to
additional states in the future.
We will continue to support CMA and the CICs in their legislative
advocacy efforts.
As we've seen, a solid communications program
can help the industry reach its legislative goals.
We will encourage increased activity by chemical company senior
executives in communications activities.
You can expect us to
continue to come to you with media contact opportunities.
And we will promote a rational public dialogue on the subject of
risk perception.
Working with Bob Roland, we recently held a
CMA 038684
8
risk perception seminar for senior communications executives of a
dozen major chemical companies.
The result was an interesting
exchange of views that should encourage a more informed public
discussion of this important subject.
Before closing, I'd like to make two recommendations to you as
senior executives of your individual companies.
The first recommendation relates to the communications revolution
we're seeing in our Industry — the people doing much of the
communicating are not experienced, professional communicators.
The middle ranks in our companies are being subjected to media
attention as never before, particularly your plant managers.
in conducting similar programs. It was agreed that this Issue would be examined
as well prior to the March meeting.
CMA 038568
2315
COMMUNICATIONS COMMITTEE
Mr. Thompson presented the annual report of the Communications Commit­
He reviewed the public con­
cerns identified in a recent Cambridge survey. The areas the committee has
Identified as high priorities for 1986/87 included: CAER/NCRIC implementation;
state CIC communications support; legislative advocacy support for CMA/CICs;
increased activity by senior executives in communications activities; and risk
perception. He recommended the following specific actions to improve performance
in the communications area: Idemnificatlon of plant managers against the risks of
working with the press, and ensuring that company emergency communications proce­
dures are as up-to-date as the company emergency response procedures.
tee > a summary of which is contained in Exhibit L.
PATENT AND TRADEMARK COMMITTEE
Mr. O'Brien presented the annual report of the Patent and Trademark
Committee, a summary of which is contained in Exhibit M.
AIR TOXICS CONTROL POLICY
Mr. Sorgentl and Mr. Berryman outlined the evolution of the proposed
program to address the air toxics issue. Mr. Sorgentl reported on the activities
of the ad hoc Executive Committee group comprised of himself, Messrs. Forney,
McKennon and Street, and representatives of the Environmental Management Committee
which had been appointed to resolve CMA's policy on this issue following the
October Board meeting. Mr. Berryman Introduced the other presenters and their
individual segments.
Mr. Holladay reported on the status of existing federal and state lav
regulating toxic air emissions. He also described various proposals pending or
expected to be introduced In the Congress and the states in 1986.
Mr. Symuleski presented the proposed policy and related Implementation
procedures on air toxics emissions and reviewed in detail what was Intended by
various elements of the proposal.
Mr. Kelley presented an overview of the package of legislative princi­
ples which had been developed to address 37 distinct legislative issues involved
in air toxics. Mr. Marchesanl described how the policy, options/procedures
document, and the legislative principles were all Integrated. Examples were
presented of how the preferred, acceptable and worst case scenarios in the legis­
lative principles are based on the policy and the various implementation
procedures contemplated thereunder.
Mr. Roland presented an overview of the Association's tentative plans
for implementing the policy, including options for a public announcement In March
and concepts for enlisting, supporting and documenting member company participa­
tion. He indicated a work plan was under development and that an interdisci­
plinary team of committee members and staff would be charged with ongoing development and execution of that plan.
CMA 038569
2316
Considerable discussion followed concerning the language in the policy
and implementation procedures. Several amendments to the policy and
implementation procedures were made. The importance of being able to document
member companies' performance pursuant to the policy was stressed.
ON MOTION, duly made and seconded, It was
VOTED: That the proposed policy on air
toxics control, as amended and set forth In
Exhibit N, be approved.
The Board agreed that it was inappropriate for it to formally vote on
the implementation procedures. However, it was also agreed that the procedures
were an Important document and that the suggestions made by the Board to amend
them should be incorporated and that the document should be subject to review and
updating by the EMC as the program evolved. The implementation procedures, as
amended by the Board, are set forth In Exhibit 0.
On behalf of the Board, Chairman Sella expressed appreciation for the
distinguished efforts of the ad hoc committee and the entire EMC.
SUPERFUND REAUTHORIZATION
Association Activities - Mr. Stover presented an overview of recent
developments and related Association activities and strategies. Mr. Stover
expressed his gratitude to the Dow Chemical Company for the outstanding contribu­
tion made by Mr. Lee Nute in serving as the Superfund project manager during the
past year.
Legislative Status - Mr, Denyes* report is attached as Exhibit P.
He highlighted the likely makeup of the House-Senate Conference Committee and the
^potential areas of conflict, and some possible scenarios for resolution. The
impact of Gramm/Rudman/Rollings and the tax reform debate were also discussed.
Mr. Denyes identified some ongoing areas of CMA activity, including the targeting
of conferees, as well as members of the Senate Finance Committee and the House
Ways and Means Committee. The various funding options being considered by the
Congress were discussed.
Chairman Sella reviewed the program Implemented last October and
November of senior executive visits with members of Congress. He requested chat
the Association's plan continue to Include utilization of Board members and other
senior executives in visits with the conferees and the Administration. Messrs.
Denyes and Stover Indicated that this was part of the work plan and would be
utilized as appropriate. Mr. Sella reiterated his belief that this was an
extremely Important activity which should be aggressively pursued.
Funding Policy - Chairman Sella reported on the Executive Commit­
tee's discussions regarding the Association's policy on Superfund funding. He
indicated, based largely on the input from the Government Relations Committee and
staff, that the Executive Committee agreed that no change in the Association's
CMA 038570
2317
formal policy on Superfund funding was necessary and chat the Association would
aggressively advocate the following points In the Conference Committee debate:
Freeze the feedstock tax at existing levels.
Strongly oppose the Downey amendment language.
Support a broad-based funding component.
there being no further business, the meeting was adjourned at 12:15 p.m.
Charles W. Van Vlack
Corporate Secretary
Certified correct:.
CMA 038571
EXHIBIT A
Report of the Chemical industry Trade Advisor
to'the Board of Directors
of the
Chemical Manufacturers Association
January 27, 1986
My comments are directed to trade policy - - this morning - and what I believe to be our industry's concerns. Hopefully - - they
will dove-tail with A1 Spilner's CMA International Trade Committee
Report.
I wish my report this morning had better news.
- on trade matters - - we continue to lose ground.
Unfortunately -
our tctal industry sales - - to overseas markets - - and produce
another IS - 20% abroad. As an industry - - we are one of America's
major international traders. Only agriculture - - and electronic
manufacture- compare with our industry - - in international trade
accounts.
In Washington - - Both the executive and legislative branches of
government - - have become mere interested in trade during the past
year. But the resulting patchwork quilt of initiatives is confused - nd - - in some instances - - counterproductive (i.e. tax policy).
Seme bills - - to be sure - - are well-conceived. Others - unfortunately - - run the gamut from political posturing - - to
downright foolish gunslinging. We cannot assume that wisdom - - or
common sense - - will carry the day. Just look at the democratic tax
bill - - as the latest example - - of how badly our industry has been
treated.
Furthermore - - in the marketplace - - we're seeing the emergence
of powerful new competitors - - different competitors than we night
have envisioned only a few years ago.
The gulf states oil producers no longer hold world users on a
short leash. Today they have abundant cheap feedstocks - - new lowcoast production capacity - - and plenty of incentive - - to sell a
lot of value-added petrochemicals in our markets. That incentive
grows daily as the price of that oil barrel drops. We were all too
clearly reminded of this by Saudi planning Minister Hisham Nazir at
CMA's October conference.
If you follow trade statistics - - you know that the U.S. has
had an increasing merchandise trade deficit since 1980. In 1985 - and this is rough because all the numbers haven't been totted up - it looks as if tha trade deficit will be over $140-billion - - up at
CMA 038572
2
least 14% from 1984's deficit. As recently as 1980 - - we had a
manufacturing trade surplus of $5-billion.
Notwithstanding this national disaster - - our chemical industry
still achieved a statistical trade surplus - - estimated to be $7.6billion for 1985. Although we seem to be holding our own in chemical
exports - - an estimated $22.2-billion in 1985 - - chemical imports
have been increasing rapidly - - by about 11% per year since 1980.
They reached a record $14.6-billion last year - - and the USA’s share
of world trade - - declined for the 5th straight year.
In other words - - our industry trade surplus has dropped by
almost $12.2-billion.
Myron Foveaux recently gave his annual public trade
prognostication for 1986. Myron's numbers are based on the forecasts
- - that he obtains from about 45 of our chemical companies. He
forecasts our exports will be flat in 1986 - - despite the weakening
of the dollar - - and that imports will be up about 3.5 percent - to about $15.1 million. That will result in another 7 percent
decline in our trade surplus for the year - - to about $7 billion.
increasing share of our markets at home - - to foreign-based
producers.
Lest we draw consolation from the fact that we have any trade
surplus at all - - let's dissect its meaning. A trade surplus - means that the sales of our exports - - exceed the sales of imported
chemicals sold in the U.S. As you know - - sales alone doesn't mean
much if your pockets are empty at the end of the trading day.
I believe our trade picture - - is alot gloomier than our
projected $7.1 billion surplus suggests. If we had a way to
calculate a trade profitability balance - - the net effect of
chemical exports versus imports - - on our aggregate bottom line - would it still be a surplus? I doubt it.
Cn the export side of the ledger - - I suspect a lot of
companies are exporting near costs - - to preserve or build volume.
Consider the comment by IMC president George Kennedy - - In the New
York Times Last January - - "We've maintained - - or in some cases
of our profitability - - that's another story. We've had to cut them
- - in order to make up for the strong dollar."
Even if the U.S. can sustain a weaker dollar - - our exports
still face a myriad of problems - - High tariffs - - non-tariff
barriers - - subsidized nationalized competitors - - cheaper
feedstocks - - and our own unique brand of legislative impediments - including the burdensome e st of regulation.
CMA 038573
3
"exports." But trade means exports - - and imports. And that
increasing import figure - - should cause our industry to get cur
antenna up.
Are we simply being outgunned in our home markets by better
products and productivity abroad? or - - are we the victim of overt
and covert subsidies - - the largesse of our own GSP system - - our
open markets - - and the adverse effect of an overvalued dollar?
Trade should be a two-way street - - but in many initiatives - - both
traffic lanes seem to be coming our way.
Each of our companies are impacted by foreign competition
problems. Our exports have pretty much stagnated. Imports are
causing price - - and volume ripples - - in many of the domestic
markets. Our own government has negotiated away a piece of our
industry - - bromine products - t to Israel without as ouch as a byyour-leave. The prospect of further concessions - - Canada - Mexico - - and a new round of trade talks - - are not visible on our
horizon.
Some of our executives have stated - - that your companies
cannot tolerate further tariff concessions. Period!
1 believe there is a sense within the industry - - that past
multilateral trade agreements have not always been mutually equitable
- - that our chemical industry has given a lot - - without getting
very much in return. Regardless - - the administration is committed
to a further opening of the u.S. market - - through both the
bilateral and multilateral processes. It's pretty much of a "fait
•accomple" that several key events - - broad free trade negotiations
with Canada - - and a New GATT Round • - will begin within the next
13 months - • and Mexico's current problems can become our industry's
problem very shortly.
Concerning the future Multilateral Trade Negotiations - - I
believe that its not realistic that we oppose an MTN. It will
support the process.
We should be assigning our top international people to help
develop sound industry policy. We need cogent arguments. And we
need allies in other industries - - to ensure that our industry will
be fairly treated - - and not given up as a sacrificial lamb.
Beliave me - - this is a very important exercise - - As U.S. Bromine
producers learned - - During the U.S.-Israel frae trade process.
They were lucky - - to at least avoid a precipitous removal of
bromine tariffs ar.d - - instead - - are experiencing an extended
phase-down.
The CMA Board was presented with an international Trade
Comittee-recommended statement of principles concerning a New GATT
Round. Al Spilnar will discuss the ITC position in more detail.
CMA 038574
These principles art - - of course - ~ general - - but they contain
some important concepts:
- - The elimination of trade distorting practices - - subsidies
precedence over tariff reduction activities. An MTN should be
primarily a tariff-swapping meet.
- - Trade policy should not be subordinated to our foreign
producers are asked to pay the price - - for foreign policy gains.
- - The private sector should not be cut out of the negotiations.
- - The MTN process should not restrict - - the Administration's
bilateral treaty effort.
- - Development of a binding dispute settlement process - - must
be part of a new round. This is important. The GATT will continue
to be a weak sister - - unless it is given sene teeth.
- should be considered on the basis
of foreign requests - - and - - under no circumstances - - should
they volunteered across-the-board.
• - Chemical tariff concessions - - should not be made in
exchange for concessions given to another U.S. industry. He are not
in the business of dispensing charity.
- - We also need an investment agreement - - which will ensure
that we can situate production - - where raw materials availability
or markets dictate. We need to have equal access to local financing
of profits can be repatriated. Foreign National tax policy - - and
investment incentives - - should be granted on a national treatment
basis.
An Intellectual Property Policy - - must be part-and-parcel of
any new agreement. H £ 0 is the strength of our industry - - our
"hold card". If we let it be acquired - - without compensation - by foreign competitors - - we will be giving away a crucial part of
our future.
If you look at these statements in your briefing books - you'll see that each is an important concept - - not just a piece of
blue sky.
Trade legislation is the other key international area - - with
which we should be concerned. When I talk about trade legislation •
• I'm focusing on import-related initiatives - - changing the importremedy laws - - and considering the degree - - torvhich natural
resources subsidies should be countervailed.
CMA 038675
- 5 There are - - of course - - Many export-related areas of law - that affect our trade competitiveness. Seme such as foreign corrupt
practices and anti-boycott - - which were major causes a few years
bach - - are still unresolved.
Realistically - - If we get a single omnibus trade bill - - it
will be an achievement. Congress was in a dither in 1985 and no
clear trade legislation picture emerged. Because 1986 is an election
year - - We have a pretty small window - - perhaps until June for
something to happen.
What that bill would finally look like is anybody's guess. The
elements of such a bill - - will no doubt be drawn from several
proposals - - that were introduced last session and - - possibly - from the administration's own plan. So far - - the administration
has kept its own suggested wording under wraps.
However - - some key points to look for are:
- - General Trade competitiveness - - several proposals have
been made - - to establish a committee or council - - to evaluate the
effectiveness of cur trade laws ar.d agreements - - or to establish
what the general objective or our trade policy should be - - or some
combination of the above. The object would be to elevate trade's
- - Exchange rates - - proposals range from mandatory actions - to achieve exchange rate parity - - to congressional statements ----that a conference should be held - - to explore options and
mechanisms - - to prevent exchange rate fluctuations.
variations of a statement - - to authorize the Administration - - to
negotiate in a New MTN Round. Some proposals go as far as to list
detailed negotiating objectives. The House Republicans' proposal - Alone - - Addresses U.S.-Canada free trade .
clause" which would allow either Congress - - the Administration - or a private entity - - to request an investigation - - whether an
industry is being injured due to imports. Unfair trade practices
need not be proven. The various proposals would require industry - to commit to an adjustment plan - - In return for a favorable finding
- - would give the President less discretion in overriding ITC
findings - - and would shorten the processing time for petitions.
really an export provision. It gives the president the authority ----to retaliate against unfair foreign trade practices or barriers.
Various proposals - - would - - again - - shorten the processing time
- - include "targeting” as an unfair practice - - and would mandate
specific 0.S. retaliation measures - - against unfair processes. As
with Section 201 - - Congress wants to tighten these remedies - -
CMA 038576
6
making them more usable by business - - and more predictable in their
outcome.
- - intellectual property rights - - several proposals want to
tighten the prosecution of violators - - and ease the process of
uncovering such violations. This is particularly important to
pharmaceuticals - - and pesticide producers.
- * Export Finance - - House Democrats - - favor increased
future funding for direct lending. House Republicans - - on the
other hand - - want treasury and ex-im to have authority to match
mixed credits.
The other major import-re1ated issue - - and this one may end up
in the omnibus trade package - - is the question of whether upstream
subsidies - - should be countervailable. As first proposed by
Representative 5am Gibbons in 1984 - - U.S. Companies would be able
to get relief - - in the form for countervailing duties - - when
imports benefit substantially - - from the use of a natural resource
in the manufacturing country. Benefit would be assumed - - when the
natural resource is available to the foreign manufacturers - - at a
price "lower than the export price - - or fair market value - whichever is appropriate."
This upstream subsidies issue - - is a real corker for the
chemical industry - - We have companies who are strongly on opposite
sides of the issue.
At CMA we have a very active working group - - they met quite a
few times - - during a relatively short period in 1984. That group
was split right down the middle over this provision of the Gibbon's
bill.
At NAM - - the same thing happened - - right down the middle.
The international trade pendulum - - has swung totally in the
opposite direction since 1980. Our main concerns at the beginning of
the decade - - were export oriented - - offensive measures. Now the
issues are primarily import oriented - - defensive measures designed
to protect our domestic markets.
Like the patriots last night - - We have to get our offense
working.
Administration - - that all major legislation initiatives - - must be
considered in light of how they affect our trade competitiveness.
The tax initiative - • Superfund - - Export of Hazardous Substances
balanced against their trade effects - - which translate directly
into jobs.
As The Chemical Industry Trade Advisor - - My role is to be a
focal point - - for the 4 key chemical groups I mentioned earlier -
CMA 038677
t
- and to assure that - - as much as possible - - our industry speaks
as a single voice.
I am occasionally asked to deliver committee testimony - - in
support of a policy recommendation - - that has the blessing of those
groups.
I will also report to you periodically - - on developments about
which you should be aware - - or which require high level industry
action.
need your input - - and your support.
Last September - - CMA's ITC held a 2-day planning conference.
Committee members were asked to bring a copy - - of a public
statement about trade - - made by a senior executive of their
respective cempanies. The ITC
- - that about half the companies present - - had no senior
executive who had spoken out on trade - - no executive to champion
trade policy activities in the company.
A sound trade policy - - for out industry - - requires a long­
term commitment from all members of this Board. If our industry is
to remain internationally competitive - - we must all become involved
- - in convincing the administration - - that the future of
manufacturing - - in this country - - requires the development - - of
an aggressive trade policy initiative.
Each of you has a measure of clout
and key members of Congress. Let's put
'International Trade Committee's efforts
rules - - for our industry's industry's
with the Administration - some of it behind CMA’s
- - to reestablish the ground
international competitiveness.
Thank you.
CMA 038578
f
EXHIBIT B
Remarks to CMA's Board of Directors
by Allan J,
Chairman.
Spilner
International Trade Committt**
January 27.
1986
Thank you.
Hr. Chairman, and thank you. Dexter. for your
•xcallant summary of tha trada situation and tha trada policy
issuas tha (J. S. chamical industry is facing.
This morning. I
will touch on soma of thasa issuas. and will review what CMA's
intarnational Trada Committaa accomplishad in 1983 and what it
plans for 1986.
Also, what wa axpact to ask of tha Board in
1986.
first, a briaf raviaw of tha industry's rasults in 1983.
Shipm nts ara astimatad to hava sat anothar naw racord of
S217.4 billion, about 3% above 1984.
Nat incoma aftar taxas was
S10. 6 billion. 18% balow 1984's racord high and about equal to
•arnings in 1979. whan shipmants wara only *147 billion.
Myron Foveaux's analysis indicatas that tha 18% drop in nat
•arnings was dua> at laast in part, to unpracadantad write-offs
against earnings during tha yaar.
In 1986. writa-offs ara
•xpectad to continua. but at a raducad laval.
Shipmants ara
•xpact d to incraasa by 3%.
Nat aarnings ara axpactad to
incraasa by 10%.
Dexter mantionad tha U.S. chamical industry's trada surplus,
which fall from *12.2 billion in 1980 to *7.6 billion in 1983.
and is axpactad to drop furthar to *7. 1 billion in 1986.
Viewed
anothar way. axports incraasad only *2 billion, or a total of 7%.
over tha fiva-yaar pariod from 1980 to 1983. whila imports
incraasad *6 billion, or 70%. during tha sama pariod.
Unless
this trand is ravarsad. tha trada surplus could disappaar in tha
futura.
Why ara axports baraly holding thair own whila imports continua
to incraasa at a ralativaly rapid rata? Part of tha trand might
ba dua to changing comparativa advantaga ovar which wa hava no
control.
Part of it might also ba dua to tha still ralativaly
high valua of tha dollar.
Howavar. soma of tha trand is
certainly dua to othar factors such as rastrictad accass to
foreign markats.
I
CMA 038S79
Market access restrictions often take the form of high tariffs
used to protect relatively inefficient local producers.
Access
is also restricted by lau»s requiring owners of patents in certain
foreign countries to produce the product in that country or lose
exclusive rights to the patent.
In such cases* the patent owner is sometimes prohibited from
importing the patented product into that country when a local
producer decides to make it there* and is also prohibited from
collecting royalties from that producer.
Section 301 of U. S. trade law authorizes the President to
retaliate against the unfair practices of foreign governments or
instrumentalities which harm U. S. exports* but 301 only applies
to non-tar iff barriers which violate international trade
agreements.
At the present time* there are no effectively
enforceable international agreements on intellectual property
rights such as patents.
Nevertheless. CliA is already on record in strong support for the
establishment of such agreements and* where appropriate* has
included statements to that effect in testimony over the last f w
years.
The trend of rising imports might also be due* in part, to the
United States being overly generous in continuing to grant duty­
free entry under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) to
imports of eligible products from developing countries whose
producers are now fully competitive with producers in the
industrialized countries.
CMA addressed the GSP issue when renewal legislation was
proposed.
The CMA position advocated stricter standards for
graduation of beneficiary countries from duty-free treatment of
imports under GSP* in cases where preferential access to the U.S.
market is no longer needed.
A two-tiered system of benefits was included in the renewal of
GSP in the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984.
Regulations
implementing the two-tier system will be issued later this year
on completion of the Administration's two-year study to determin
which countries should receive which level of benefits.
The
International Trade Committee will review the regulations to make
sure they are adequate.
In dealing with these and other issues affecting trade* the
Committee's primary concerns are that the U. S. ctremical industry
be treated fairly, and that any trade negotiations result in
increased export and investment opportunities.
-2CMA 038580
for the procttt its If, CliA member companies, acting through
the Trade Committee and then the Board, must first reach
consensus on the issue*.
Then CMA must lobby the Congress, the
Administration and the trade negotiators, as appropriate, to make
things happen.
as
CMA lobbying will involve not only the International Trade
Committee and QCITA. but also the Government Relations
Committee.
Depending on the issue, we may even ask that some of
you become involved in the lobbying effort.
After all. as the
headline of an article in the January issue of Dun's Business
Month put it, “CEO's Make the Best Lobbuists."
As an example. CMA
Such efforts can be and have been effective.
members were largely responsible for the insertion into the
renewal of the Generalized System of Preferences and into the
Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act ("CBI"> of provisions for
the protection of the intellectual property of U. S. companies in
countries covered by the legislation.
Timing is also important.
For maximum effectiveness, we may need
to prom te CMA positions to the Administration before the
Administration's position has been announced.
Afterwards is
often too late to get anything changed.
With that as background, I will review what the Trade Committee
accomplished in 1989 and what it plans for 1986.
Bilateral and multilateral trade initiatives were the most
important issues taken up by the International Trade Committee in
1989.
The Committee developed, and the Board approved, a CMA position
on bilateral free-trade negotiations between the United States
and Canada.
The CMA position supports the reciprocal elimination
of tariffs on chemicals and related products in U.S. /Canadian
trade, on the condition that the Canadian government eliminate
preferential Canadian chemical feedstock and energy policies and
restrictions on foreign investment in chemicals.
Incidentally, on Friday, I learned that the Board of Directors of
the Canadian Chemical Producer* Association (CCPA) approved a
position on U.S. /Canadian tariff negotiations that is similar to
CMA's position -- that tariffs on all chemicals should be on the
table for negotiation, not just certain chemical subsectors or
groups of products such as CCPA's original list of 26.
A copy of
CCPA's position is on its way to us.
In January, the Board approved a CMA position supporting
publication and implementation of the draft White House policy on
the export of hazardous substances.
CMA 038581
Th _ draft policy is based on tha principla of exchanging
information on regulatory activitias with othar countrias rath tr
than on diract controls such as licansing of exports or
prashipmant notification to tha fortign govarnmant on aach
transaction (movamant of product).
An ad hoc group consisting of CMA mambars and raprasantativas of
thar trada associations concarnad with U.S. policy on tha export
of hazardous substancas was sat up and bagan advocating adoption
of tha draft policy in maatings with tha Administration.
During tha 2nd quarter. tha Unitad Statas and Mexico signad a
trada agraamant in which Maxico agraad to aliminata axport
subsidias ovar a pariod of time# in axchanga for baing grantad
tha injury tast in countarvai1ing duty trada ramady actions
brought in tha Unitad Statas.
Tha two govarnmants also announcad thay would bagin work toward a
ganaral framawork agraamant to improva trada batwaan tha two
countrias.
In rasponsa to this announcement# tha Intarnational
Trada Committaa bagan to davalop a sat of principlas for
bilataral trada batwaan tha Unitad Statas and Maxico.
Negotiations with Maxico ara not axpactad to rasult in a fraatrada agraamant in tha 1990's# or avan in tha 1990's.
Thara ara
just too many diffarancas batwaan tha two countrias for that to
happan.
Throughout tha year# tha Administration continuad to promota tha
idaa of a naw Round of Multilataral Trada Nagotiations undar tha
0 naral Agraamant on Tariffs and Trada (GATT) to shora up tha
prasant trading systam and to davalop rulas for araas of trada
not prasantly covarad by GATT.
By yaar and/ howavar* final agraamant on whan tha nagotiations
should bagin and on what thay should covar< had not yat baan
raachad.
Tha chamical industry has an important staka in a naw Round of
Multilataral Trada Nagotiations sinca chamical tariffs ara still
high anough to hava a significant affact on pricas in both U. S.
and axport markats.
In praparation for tha naw Round# tha Trada Committaa davalopad a
proposad CMA position basad on a statamant of principlas which
addrass U.S. negotiating policy# disputa sattlamant procedures
and trada issues of particular importance to tha chamical
industry.
These issues include foreign market access# tariffs# tha
establishment of a coda on foreign investment# and improvement in
th
protection afforded intellectual property rights.
Approval
for tha proposad position will be sought from tha Board tomorrow.
CMA 038582
1989 was also a year of much Congressiona1 debate on trada< but
no significant trade legislation was anactad.
Congressman
introduced a large number of trada bills in frustration over the
growing trada deficit and out of concern that the Administration
lacks a comprehensive policy to deal with trade problems.
However, the number and complexity of the trad* bills proposed,
the lack of strong central Congressional leadership on
international trade and the House Ways and Means Committee's
preoccupation with tax reform prevented passage of broad scope
trade legislation during the year.
Possibly in response to the Congressional activity on trade, in
September. President Reagan announced a new 20 point Trade Policy
Action Plan to pursue U.S. rights and interests in international
commerce.
Under the Action Plan, a Strike Force was established to initiate
or accelerate trade remedy proceedings against unfair trade
practices of other countries.
Several trade remedy proceedings
were initiated by the Administration by year end.
While 1989 was a year of Congressional debate on trade and
Administration preparation for negotiations.
1986 will see more
action.
Congress has stated that international trade will be the next
major issue it will address, once work on tax policy is out of
the way.
The House Ways and Means Committee is planning a
weekend retreat early in the session to initiate its work on
trade problems.
What the result will be is uncertain.
As Dexter mentioned,
getting a single omnibus trade bill out of the many which have
been introduced will be an achievement.
However. Congress, wi11 not pass sector-specific legislation
restricting imports unless the trade deficit continues to grow
unabated and the Strike Force and other elements of the
President's Trade Action Plan are considered ineffective.
Rather, any new trade legislation will focus on strengthening the
President's authority to initiate action against unfair trade
practices of foreign countries, and will encourage the President
to take such action.
New trade legislation may also include limitations on the
President's discretion in granting import relief in "escape
clause" cases once an injury finding has been made.
In addition,
it may include expanded trade adjustment assistance for workers
and assistance for communities whose industries have been hit by
international competition.
Tha Committ a is studying individual provisions of bills that
might hava an impact on tha chamical industry and will davalop
and racommand CMA positions* as naadadi for Board approval.
Tha Unitad Statas and othar GATT signatory countrias will
probably bagin a naw Round of Multilataral Trada Nagotiations
undar GATT.
Onca tha Board approvas a CMA position on tha naw
Round* tha Trada Committaa and tha Govarnmant Ralations Committaa
will plan a combinad affort to promota tha CMA position to both
tha Administration and tha Congrass.
Th
Unitad Statas and Canada will bagin formal nagotiations
toward a fraa-trada araa agraamant batwaan tha two countrias.
Tha Intarnational Trada Committaa has bagun and will continua to
advocata CMA's position during tha nagotiations.
Tha Committaa will complata its work on principlas for bilataral
trada nagotiations batwaan tha Unitad Statas and Maxlco* and will
r command a CMA position for approval by tha Board.
Th
Committaa will also axamina proposals for bilataral trada
from tha Association of Southaast Asian Nations* tha Gulf
C oparation Council and othar davaloping nations and alliancas
that may saak fraa-trada agraamants with tha Unitad Statas.
Tha ad hoc group concarnad with U.S. policy on tha axport of
hazardous substancas will continua to prass tha Administration to
ralaasa and implamant its draft policy which has baan dormant at
tha Whita Housa for tha past 3-1/2 yaars.
Tha group's goal will
ba to pravant onarous axport rastrictions and diract controls.
In praparation for thasa activitias* tha Committaa has dacidad to
raorganiza its Task Groups.
Tha Export of Hazardous Substancas
Task Group has baan disbandad bacausa tha bulk of its work has
baan complatad.
Tha rast will ba carriad out by tha ad hoc
group.
Th
Intargovarnmantal Organizations Task Group has also baan
disbanda'd.
Instaad* tha Committaa as a whola will* on an as
naadad basis* addrass issuas praviously handlad by this Task
Group.
In addition* tha Import Policy Task Group and Export Policy Task
Group will ba combinad.
Tha naad for a naw Task Group to daal
axclusivaly with tha upcoming Multilataral Trada Nagotiations has
baan idantifiad.
Latar* a saparata task group or ad hoc group to
daal with tha U. S. /Canada bilataral fraa-trada nagotiations may
ba naadad.
Tha Invastmant Task Group will ba ratainad to work on invastmant
issuas arising out of nagotiations on aithar bilataral talks or
tha Multilataral Trada Nagotiations.
CMA 038584
Finally, as Dtxtar mantionad aarliar, tha Committaa naads your
support.
Wa naad to know how you faal about tha issuas< whathar
or not your company is raprasantad on tha,Trada Committaa or ana
of its Task Groups.
Wa baliava that intarnational trada is bacoming an incraasingly
important compatitiva factor for many sagmants of tha U.S.
chamical industry and that trada policy should rank high on tha
industry 's aganda.
AJS/lfw
-7CMA 038585
EXHIBIT C
Remarks to CMA's Board of Directors
Chairman, Health and Safety Committee
January 27, 1986
I am pleased to present to you today tha first annual report of the
Health and Safety Committee.
This Committee was formed by Board action In January 1985 to
provide the Association a central focus for oversight and coordination
of health and safety policy and programs. With public health and safety
concerns being the central driving force behind most recent environ­
mental and chemical control laws and regulations, the Health and Safety
Committee gives CMA the ability to orchestrate a consistently coordinat­
ed advocacy program for public health and safety policy. The Commit­
tee's oversight of health and safety policy facilitates the Integration
of these Issues Into programs and policy developments of the other
committees, resulting in a closer working relationship with the Environ­
mental Management, CommunlcatIons, Engineering Advisory, Distribution,
and State Affairs Committees and the Biomedical and Environmental
Special Programs.
The Committee replaced two standing Committees - the Chemical
Regulations Advisory Committee (CRAC) and the Occupational Safety and
Health Committee (OSH); two Executive Committee Task Groups - the Public
Compensation Task Group and the UAREP Work Group; and reduced the number
of task groups from 36 to 16. This consolidation was accomplished
without disruption of any ongoing activities or significant loss of
relationships with outside groups. This has allowed us to address the
pressing Issues with fever task groups and fever people, reducing the
number of member company representatives Involved, requiring less travel
and fewer meetings.
The restructuring of the Industry and of many CMA member companies
has presented unique challenges In that several of the key Task Group
members, and some of the Committee members have had significant job
changes, resulting in some people turnover and changes in leadership.
Unlike the predecessor committees or task groups, the current Task
Groups no longer have agency-specific responsibility but have functional
responsibility based upon the expertise needed by the group to carry out
its mission. The functional units are risk analysis, risk management,
risk communications, compensation, and external affairs and are shown
schematically on page 31 of the report.
The Committee has 6 major goals that were developed at a planning
meeting shortly after the Committee was formed. We can pick and choose
CMA 038686
2
and appropriate Task Force expertise and resources needed to achieve
successful completion of each goal.
This creates a true matrix organization and allows us to focus
resources on an Issue without redundancy and needless waste of time for
company or staff personnel.
The Committee and most of Its Task Groups have kept busy all of
1985 because of the diversity and complexity of the Issues for which the
Committee Is responsible, the reorganization necessary to consolidate
the ongoing activities without loss of momentum, and the constant demand
for action and reaction as a result of the several chemical releases
which have occurred at Bhopal, Institute, and elsewhere. We Initiated
new programs to improve the public's perception of the chemical Industry
as being responsible. We also have had some less visible but equally
necessary programs which are more basic and behind the scenes. These
activities usually Involve generally working with legislative or regu­
latory contacts on issues vital to the industry.
The remaining time that I have today will be spent discussing some
examples of programs, followed by a brief review of areas which the
Committee anticipates will require priority attention in the future.
Following the Bhopal catastrophe, a special task group, chaired by
Hamilton Hurst and reporting to the Executive Committee, developed the
two new chemical Industry programs - Program and the National Chemical
Response and Information Center (or NCRIC).
The CAER Program was assigned to the Health and Safety Committee
for Implementation and follow-up. It has been well received and contin­
ues to generate favorable reaction from the media and regulators.
Industry reception has also been good. OVer 170 companies have signed
up to participate In the CAER Program and have named an executive as the
company's CAER coordinator. The CAER coordinator Is a critical link
between the company's facilities managers and the Program.
The CAER Task Group has held a series of regional workshops at
which the Program has been described to more than 1,700 chemical Indus­
try managers, and over 1,100 sites have been selected to begin the
process for Implementing CAER. In addition, community coordinating
groups, which usually Include emergency response officials, elected
officials, and representatives of Industry and the public, have been
Initiated, CAER handbooks have been distributed in the U.S., and other
communications materials, Including slide/tape shows, videotapes, and
brochures, have received wide distribution to facilities managers,
emergency response groups, and police and fire fighters. A monthly CAER
newsletter Is prepared and distributed by the Task Group.
CAER has created a consnunlcatlons network for CMA and member
companies to local emergency response groups and to the EPA, Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), other federal agencies, and with
other trade associations.
CMA 038587
3
CAER has helped to prominently portray the industry as being
concerned with public health and safety and has given us the unique
opportunity to build public credibility. We are continuing our efforts
to capitalize upon this initiative. Although CAER has been highly
successful in showing positive actions that industry is taking, we have
some concerns of which you should be aware and that do require atten­
tion. Of the 172 companies that have signed up for the CAER Program, 60
have not submitted either of the 2 milestone reports which are now past
due. This creates concern that ve may not be able to maintain the
credibility of the Program. We need your help, through contacts you may
have in other companies, to continue to emphasize the importance of the
CAER initiative to the current and future credibility of the industry.
Turning now to the less visible programs the Committee and its Task
Groups have conducted. These activities are more numerous than the
up-front, active, visible programs, such as CAER, and have been equally
as effective in supporting CMA's advocacy positions.
In response to public legislative demands following Bhopal, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) developed their
Special Emphasis Program, designed to target chemical plants for addi­
tional safety and health inspections, irrespective of plant safety
performance. These inspections, were initially designed by OSHA to be
highly technical, in-depth process hazards reviews, rather than routine
OSHA inspections. By working with the Agency, representatives of the
Committee were able to help OSHA recognize its lack of expertise to
carry out such a program and then assisted in redrafting the program to
be one that only serves OSHA's purposes but is consistent with our
companies' process safety management reviews.
Also in the occupational safety and health arena, our Committee
became aware that a representative of the International Textile Workers
Union had chaired a committee which had completely rewritten the Bureau
of Labor Statistics Reporting Guidelines for Occupational Illness and
Injury (BLS 412). This document, which contained very onerous pro­
visions for all of industry, some of which are detailed at the top of
page 18 in your book, had already been approved by the Department of
Labor and submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (0MB) for
approval to Implement. By contacting 0MB, we were able to get the
document recalled by the Department of Labor and then rewritten to
present more balanced guidance on reporting occupational illness and
injuries. This has been followed with extensive contacts with BLS,
Including taking the Commissioner and member of her staff to tour plants
in our industry.
Representatives of the Committee have also been very active with
ERA in the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) area and have addressed
many of the concerns that surfaced during congressional hearings regard­
ing assessment and management of chemicals.
A dialogue group, under the umbrella of the Conservation Founda­
tion,- came to agreement on mechanisms for EPA management of new chemi­
cals after Premanufacturing Notification (PMN). This issue is a TSCA
deficiency that was highlighted during congressional testimony.
CMA 038688
4
Representatives of the TSCA Reauthorization Task Group provided the
leadership to bring the industry, public Interest representatives, and
state members of the dialogue group to closure on the Program. The
Program, now called "New Chemical Follow-Up," has been recommended to
EPA for action. The Agency has indicated a willingness to initiate
rulemaking to codify the Program, thus defusing this concern in future
congressional activities.
Another concern during congressional discussions of TSCA was
negotiated testing. The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), CMA,
and EPA worked collectively to develop a procedure for negotiating test
agreements and developing test rules under Section 4. The new procedure
was developed under the principle that test rules and negotiated testing
agreements should be equivalent and consent Orders under TSCA Section 4
would be the primary mechanism to satisfy that principle. The Consent
Orders, as the test rules, would Include requirements to ensure adequate
and reliable data, would be enforceable, and would conform to other TSCA
regulatory requirements. In addition, the new procedures would Include
an opportunity for public participating and an expedited schedule for
negotiating and rulemaking. After final agreement by the 2 Involved
parties, EPA will issue the procedures as an interim final rule in
February or March 1986. The result of this successful effort has been
to lower public pressure to amend TSCA, precluding what could be more
onerous testing procedures and timetables. It has also improved working
relationships among the 3 parties involved In the negotiations.
The Committee has also, through the Public Compensation Task Group,
assisted Government Relations In recommending and supporting various
Initiatives in the Superfund reauthorization process. These have
Included recommending public health surveillance as an Integral compo­
nent of Superfund, assisting in preparing lobbying packages opposing
Victimsf Compensation proposals as these were Introduced or discussed,
and communicating the results of the UAREP study of possible health
effects from hazardous waste sites. The Superfund bills before Congress
have no victims' demonstration programs, no federal cause of action, and
much better health studies provisions as a result.
Priority Issues which are anticipated to require significant
attention in the future are the following:
o
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has been
relatively inactive in standards development for the last 4 years.
Few standards have been developed and those that have been devel­
oped have responded to court mandates or intense legislative
pressure. Industry has not had to comply with the new regulations,
but we have missed opportunities to assist in the development of
standards which address workplace needs in a cost-effective way.
OSHA will not be able to continue being unresponsive to its legis­
lative mandate, nor Is it in Industry's best Interest to continue
to miss significant opportunities to assure cost-effective, practi­
cal workplace standards.
Through its National Emphasis Program, OSHA has served notice
that our industry, irrespective of our excellent safety record,
CMA 038589
5
will be more carefully scrutinized for workplace safety and health.
We can anticipate that, in addition t increased standards-setting,
chemical plants will be inspected more frequently by OSHA. The
Health and Safety Committee is prepared to assist OSHA where it is
needed and appropriate, including considering the development of
some forward-looking programs to continue to improve the industry's
image.
o
In the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) area, biotechnology
regulation is relatively quiet now but will likely become more
active in the future. Although it may become a high visibility
issue, we want to keep it separate from other TSCA Issues. We will
continue to monitor work closely with other trade associations and
develop positions as appropriate.
Reauthorization of TSCA has been given a lower priority by
Congress for the last year, largely because their calendar was so
full of other health-related activities. This will not last,
however. We will continue to address the identified concerns and
stand ready to become a player in the debate as soon as it is
rejoined.
A National Research Council (NRC) report stated that the
toxicity data that are available on chemicals in commerce are both
very limited and Inadequate. Many people are now using this report
to show a supposed need for mandatory testing and a minimal test
set. Unfortunately, no readily available body of data exists to
give a better understanding than is given by the NRC report. The
Committee will be evaluating the accuracy of the report and what
can be done to Improve the data base and refute the report. This
is probably a longer term project, however, and not one that lends
itself to relatively early resolution.
o
Legislative activities will continue, especially In the area of the
chemical Industry's effect on the health of the public and our work
force. Occupational illness had drawn several congressional bills
recently and the proponents of such measures have not been success­
ful yet. The Committee Is already actively participating in this
debate and will continue in order to prevent our Industry's opera­
tions and products from being unfairly singled out for legislative
treatment.
Public compensation activities will continue, especially in
the area of product liability, where we are working with the CMA
General Counsel's office, and the Government Relations staff to
address Senator Danforth's bill. The Superfund reauthorization
battle will be rejoined soon and health effects from hazardous
waste sites will continue to be one of the emotional leaders in
this struggle. The Public Compensation Task Group will continue to
play an important role In this area.
The issue of health effects from emissions from operating
facilities will come more to the fore. The Environmental Manage­
ment Committee, assisted by the Health and Safety Committee, has
CMA 038590
6
been developing a position on this. Congress and the regulatory
agencies vlll continue* however* to use public health as the
driving force for more legislation and regulation addressed at the
chemical Industry. The Health and Safety Committee will continue
to develop health policy for the Association and to assist other
committees and departments to respond to Issues in the public
health arena.
The Health and Safety Committee has been conceived, bom, and
nurtured during a very trying time for the chemical Industry. We
believe we he successfully negotiated this traumatic birthing without
losing any momentum, with our goals constantly In front of us and our
eyes on them.
f
One of the hallmarks of the Committee's activities has been to try
to address Issue In there entirety by going to the heart of the problem
and looking at how legislators and regulators decide to take action.
Using this assessment, we have addressed the Issues in depth and pro­
posed long-term fixes, not just treated the obvious symptoms and provid­
ed a cosmetic cure and left the roots of the issue unattended. The
Committee Intends to continue this approach to the health and safety
issues which will be affecting the chemical Industry In the near and
distant future.
i
I will be glad to answer any questions you may have.
i
s
i
i
i
CMA 038591
EXHIBIT D
REPORT OF THE
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY
Request for Individual Company Support and Action
Objective
To increase the effectiveness of the Chemical Industry Council of
New Jersey in representing the chemical industry in New Jersey.
Background
Chemical industry Presence in New Jersey
o
Approximately 95,000 workers are employed by New Jersey's
chemical industry (largest chemical workforce in nation)
o
New Jersey's chemical industry is the largest manufacturing
industry in the state
o
New Jersey companies manufacture chemical products valued
at S14.2 billion per year (second in nation)
o
New Jersey's industry produces about 12.50% of the nation's
chemical output
I
CIC Organisation and Programs
CIC/NJ is comprised of 87 member companies (See Attachment 1) from
the chemical, pharmaceutical and allied products industries. The
Council employs two professional and two support staff and has a
budget of approximately $250,000.
Political Climate
The New Jersey legislature is recognized as one of the most active
in the country and is considered anti-industry in the environmental
and health and safety areas. The state has been a "leader" on such
legislative issues ast State Superfund (including funding and
liability standards), worker and community right to know, the Toxic
Catastrophe Prevention Act, and Environmental Cleanup
Responsibility Act (ECRA).
Follow-Up To September State Chemical Organizations Report
At the September CMA Board of Directors meeting, a special report
on the status and programs of the various state chemical
organizations was presented by Mr. Bill Wood of Dupont, who
chaired a special ad hoc work group established to conduct this
CMA 038592
report. The report gave an overview of the status and programs of
the 13 CIC's and made some generic recommendations for CMA and
member company actions to improve the effectiveness of all C1C
programs generally. Although reaction to the report was favorable,
several of the Association's Officers and Directors requested that
more specific requests for action be made to the Board with respect
to individual CIC programs where there are particular problems
and/or needs. At the October Annual Meeting all of the state
chemical organizations, their leaders were asked to identify those
areas where they believed CMA's Directors could uniquely assist
their program. The CIC/NJ is the first to respond.
Recommendations
The leadership of the CIC/NJ, acting pursuant to the opportunity made
available as a result of the September CMA Board meeting, suggests that
the following actions be taken by individual companies at the direction
of members of the CMA Board.
It is the belief of the CIC/NJ leadership
that positive action on these recommendations will result in
significantly increased effectiveness on the part of the CIC/NJ. It is
also their belief that direct action by members of CMA's Board and
other CMA Executive Contacts are essential to accomplish these actions.
Company Participation
I
1. That nominees from CMA member companies to the CIC/NJ's
Board and Executive Advisory Committee represent the most
senior individuals possible from New Jersey operations.
i
2. That CMA member companies support, through organizational
membership and active committee participation, the CIC/NJ's
programs.
Increased Public Relations/Communications Assistance
ft
In order to implement the communications program recently
developed by the CIC/NJ Public Relations Committee, that the
CMA Directors with New Jersey operations provide company
public relations professionals to concentrate on
communications support for such legislative issues as air
toxics and waste site cleanup.
Availability of Company Technical Experts
That the Board of Directors be willing to make available, on
an as-needed basis, nationally recognized company technical
experts in the following areas to assist in legislative and
i
CMA 038593
regulatory advocacy. This would augment the excellent work
being done by many facility based technical personnel.
risk assessment and management
process safety
air toxics
groundwater
cleanup standards
pesticides regulations
Surplus Office Equipment
That companies donate the following surplus (or new) office
equipment:
i
postage machine and mailers
addressograph
letter-quality printer compatible with Digital computers
fils cabinets/bookcases
video recording and camera equipment
surplus desk and conference chairs
Personal CEO/Senior Executive Commitment
That members of the Board of Directors' with facilities or
corporate headquarters in New Jersey commit to appear at
CIC/NJ press conferences, deliver speeches, participate in
media tours, or attend editorial board visits with major
newspapers on the following chemical industry issues in
support of the CIC advocacy program:
abandoned waste site cleanup funding
air toxics
groundwater
CAER program /HMACs
To further chemical industry success on key issues, it is also
requested that CEOs/Senior Executives in New Jersey host
private meetings at company facilities with various state
legislators.
Action Required
Board endorsement of the thrust of the recommendations and subsequent
indications of individual company actions to achieve them.
CMA
CMA 038694
EXHIBIT E
Remarks to CMA's Board of Directors
By William M. Bellamy, Jr.
Chairman, Tax Policy committee
January 27, 1986
In 1985, Che Tax Policy Committee was very deeply involved in
key legislative issues affecting the chemical industry.
Responding
co the numerous problems raised in both tax reform and Superfund
reauthorization legislation, the Committee effectively handled a wide
range of tax issues that could Increase industry tax costs by more
chan $6 billion annually.
Since November, 1984, the Tax Policy Committee has focused on
che major tax revision issues that are of continuing concern to the
chemical Industry.
These Issues were first raised in the context of
che Treasury Department's 1984 Tax Reform Proposals and later In the
preparation of CMA's testimony on President Reagan's May 28 tax
reform program before the House Committee on Ways and Means.
In general, President Reagan's 1985 tax reform program would
shift almost 8140 billion of the Federal Income tax burdens now borne
by individuals to the business sector.
The President's program would
substantially increase the tax burdens of businesses chat are capital
intensive and that engage in significant international trade.
The specific Issues raised in the President's program are set
out in detail at Tab 6 of our committee report.
For this reason I
will not repeat that discussion except to reiterate why federal tax
issues are so vitally important to the chemical Industry.
First, let me emphasize that for many years the chemical
industry has enjoyed one of the most favorable tax positions among
U.S. industrial sectors.
Both reasonable capital cost recovery
periods and the Investment tax credit have been available for
chemical manufacturing Investments for a number of years.
To some
extent, the principal achievement of the Accelerated Cost Recovery
System (ACRS), adopted as part of President Reagan's 1981 tax
program, was to provide other industries with tax depreciation
comparable to chat which the chemical industry enjoyed.
Beyond its favorable depreciation position, the chemical
industry is unique among capital intensive industries in che extent
to which it can utilize the investment tax credits generated.
In
1985, the chemical industry invested more chan 314 billion In new
plant and equipment, almost 90 percent of chose expenditures
qualified for che Investment tax credit.
In current dollars, the
investment tax credit reduces the annual tax bill of the U.S.
chemical industry by over $1 billion.
Moreover, the chemical industry is far more dependent on
international trade than many other capital intensive industries.
For example, in 1985 che United States exported chemicals and allied
products with a value of $22.2 billion and in chat year imported
$14,6 billion.
With a combined total of approximately $37 billion in
CMA 038695
Ic is clear that CMA has a strong, vital interest in tax reform
legislation that reflects a uniquely chemical industry concern.
We
are organized under a comprehensive work, plan to defend the
industry's interests in taxation.
We are working cooperatively to
implement that plan on Capitol Hill.
We look forward to positive
achievements in the Senate and in any tax legislation that may be
enacted this year.
In closing, let me reiterate what I told you at this time last
year.
The Tax Policy Committee and its members have worked hard this
year; the members of the Committee are true tax professionals who
have devoted a substantial amount of time and effort to achieving the
objectives of the Committee.
Again, I am proud to have served as
Chairman.
While relatively unheralded, CMA's achievements in
taxation, both legislative and regulatory, are unsurpassed in their
contribution to the well-being of our Industry.
We expect
to continue this
record of positive achievement
in
CMA 038597
EXHIBIT F
TAX REFORM ADVOCACY
Background:
The House of Representatives narrowly passed H.R. 3838, the Ways and
Means Committee tax revision legislation, after President Reagan
personally intervened in the Congressional debate. Like President
Reagan's May 28 tax program, H.R. 3838 would provide a massive shift
of Federal income tax burdens now borne by individuals to business
taxpayers, within the business sector, H.R. 3838 would substantially
increase the tax burden of businesses that are capital intensive and
that engage in significant international trade. It is conservatively
estimated that the overall impact of H.R. 3838 as passed by the House
would cost the chemical industry more than $3 billion annually.
CMA Program Development and .Response:
Since November, 1984, the Tax Policy Committee has focused on the
ma}or tax revision issues that are of continuing concern to the
chemical industry. These issues were first raised in the context of
th Treasury Department's 1984 Tax Reform Proposals and later in
preparation of CMA’s testimony before the House Committee on Ways and
Means. In addition, the Committee prepared several one-page specific
legislative issue analyses which the Taxation Task Group of the
Government Relations Comittee has used extensively in our meetings
with Congressional members and staff.
CMA commissioned Price Waterhouse to conduct a study of effective tax
> rates in the chemical industry. The Price Waterhouse study of IS
companies who are primarily engaged in chemical manufacturing shows
that these companies paid an effective tax rate of over 23 percent in
1983, one of the highest effective tax rates paid by any industry
group in that year. The Price Waterhouse study has been distributed
widely and is being used by CMA in its lobbying efforts on both tax
reform and Superfund. The response to the Price Waterhouse study has
been very favorable.
In addition, CMA provided a grant to the Institute for Research in the
Economics of Taxation (IRET) for a study on the impact of selected tax
reform proposals on capital formation in the chemical industry. These
provisions include the repeal of the investment tax credit, reduction
of depreciation benefits, recapture of accelerated depreciation, and
increased alternative minimum tax. In its brief summary, the IRET
study concludes that;
"Major provisions in the President's tax reform proposals
and in the tax reform options under consideration by the
CMA 038598
Committee on Hays and Means would have devastating effects
on the U.S. chemical manufacturing industry. Particularly
damaging would be the proposed changes in depreciation rules
along with the proposed "excess depreciation recapture" and
the alternative minimum taxes. Despite the proposed
reductions in statutory tax rates, these changes would raise
the effective tax rates to which chemical manufacturing
companies are exposed and would, as a result, materially
slow the growth in the industry's production facilities and
employment, cost the industry's employees billions of
dollars in lost real wages, and reduce the industry’s output
substantially below levels that would otherwise prevail.
The competitive position of U.S. chemical manufacturers in
both domestic and foreign markets would be significantly
eroded."
On January 6, the Senate Finance Committee announced that it will hold
hearings on tax reform beginning January 29 emphasizing the
consequences of H.R. 3838 for international trade of U.S.
manufacturers.
In these hearings, CMA is requesting the opportunity
to testify.
The Tax Policy Committee and the Government Relations Committee's
Taxation Task Group have developed a comprehensive legislative
strategy and work plan on tax reform legislation. The Taxation Task
Group has held regular meetings to implement this work plan, to share
intelligence on tax legislation, and to coordinate CMA activities with
allied trade associations. CMA has now been joined by other major
trade associations in the opposition to key tax revision proposals in
H.R. 3838 affecting capital formation and international activities.
He anticipate that there will be much greater concern in the Senate
over the tax impact on those policies than was shown in the House.
ACTION REQUIRED;
For Information Only
CMA
CMA 038599
4
Attachment
1985-1986
TAX LEGISLATION WORK PLAN
PROGRAM ELEMENTS:
JANUARY 13, 1986
l
I. POLICY REVIEW AND ISSUE EVALUATION
A. Review of Treasury I Reform Plan (completed May 1985)
J
B. Analysis of Treasury II Tax Reform Proposals
1. Analysis (completed July 31, 1985)
2. CMA Statement on Tax Reform for House Ways and
Means (completed July 30, 1985)
C. Review of H.R. 3838, House-passed Tax Revision Legislation
1. Analysis (under way)
2. Revision of CMA Statement to Reflect Provisions of H.R. 3838
(under way)
D. Selection of Priority Issues by Tax Policy Committee
(initially completed August 13, 1985; reassessment in light of
I. CEO visits to ranking members of House Committee on Ways and
Means to be scheduled after completion of House-Senate
Conference on Superfund Reauthorization.
2. CMA Request to Testify in Senate Finance Committee Hearing on
II. OUTSIDE STUDIES
A. Price-Waterhouse Study on Effective Tax Rates in the Chemical
Industry.
1. Completed (approved
2. Transmitted to;
August 13, 1985)
Joint Committee on Taxation
House Committee on ways and Means
Senate Committee on Finance
Treasury Department (Assistant Secretary for
Tax Policy)
3. Article in Tax Notes (published August 19, 1985)
4. Continued use in Congressional Tax and Superfund advocacy
CMA 038600
B. I RET Study on Impact on Chemical Industry of Proposed Changes
in Tax Treatment of Capital-intensive Investments (completed
and approved December 1, 1985)
III. ADVOCACY DOCUMENTS
A. Basic CMA statement on tax reform delivered to House ways and
Means (July 30, 1985)
B. Summary CMA position on tax reform (August 15, 1985)
C. Preparation of Separate Advocacy Documents
a. General Statement (completed July 30, 1985)
b. Brief Statements (completed August 23, 1985)
c. Modification to reflect House passage of H.R. 3838
(under way)
Specific Issues (in order of priority):
1. Capital Cost Recovery System - Investment Tax Credit
2. Foreign Tax Credit - Per Country Limitation
3. Minimum Tax (Administration and H.R. 3838 alternative)
4. Source Rule For Sales
5. Allocation of Expenses (including Interest)
6. Research and Development Expenses
7. Section 936 Possessions Credit (Puerto Rico)
LEGISLATIVE CONTACTS
A. in General
1. Legislative Contact Teams - 3 member teams consisting of
representatives from Tax Policy Committee, GRC Taxation
Task Group, and CMA. (completed, September 13, 198S)
2. Initial Contacts - Contact Teams to focus on results of
Price Waterhouse effective tax rates study, to deliver CMA
advocacy papers, to respond to questions on specific
issues, and to schedule return visits (completed
October 1, 1985)
CMA 038601
3. Task Group Meetings - Washington representatives of
member companies hold weekly briefings on tax legislation,
in these meetings CMA coordinates the tax legislative
activity of the Washington representatives through
specific assignments, review of legislative intelligence
and detailed follow-through.
B. House Advocacy Assignments
1. committee on Ways and Means
a. CMA Statement on Tax Reform - Presented by Dexter F.
Baker, President, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.
b. Meetings with Professional Staff (continuing)
c. Meetings with Committee Staff Leaders (continuing)
d. Meetings with Individual Members
i. Specific Assignments for initial contacts (completed
September 13, 1965)
ii. CEO visits to ranking members of House Committee on
ways and Means to be scheduled after completion of
House-Senate Conference on Superfund Reauthorization.
2. Leadership
a. Meetings with House Democratic Leadership (completed
September 17, 1985)
b. Meetings with House Republican Leadership (under way)
C. Senate
1. Senate Finance Committee
a. CMA Request to Testify in Hearings on H.R. 3838
(under way)
b. staff Leadership (continuing)
c. Tax Professionals (continuing)
d. Individual Senators - Specific assignments of Washington
representatives (under way)
2. Senate leadership - Specific assignments to be made after
CMA 038602
CMA testimony on H.R. 3838.
Administration Contacts
A. Initial comments to Treasury by CMA Executive Delegation.
Comments from member company CEO's on impact of
Treasury II tax plan with respect to capital formation and
foreign tax issues as requested in Executive letter from
B. Courtesy comments to Assistant Secretary Tax Policy
1. Price Waterhouse Study
2. IRET Study
C. General reservation on opposition mail until after MouseSenate conference on superfund reauthorization legislation.
Coordination of Activities with Allied Trade Associations
identification of allied interest groups (completed September 9,
1985)
Specific Assignments of task group members to attend/monitor
allied trade group meetings (completed, September 13, 1985)
Transmittal of CMA Tax Policy position to allied trade
associations
1. Original statement (September, 1985)
2. Revised statement to reflect provisions of H.R. 3838
(by February 6, 1986)
Response to inquiries. More direct activities to be considered
after House-Senate Conference on Superfund Reauthorization is
completed.
CONTACTS:
St. Clair Tweedie
Director, Government Relations
American Cyanamid Company
Chairman, Taxation Task Group
(202) 789-1222
William M. Bellamy, Jr.
Chief Tax Counsel
Union Carbide Corporation
Chairman, Tax Policy Committee
(203) 794-6214
Robert B. Hill
Legislative Representative
for Taxation
CMA Staff Executive
CMA 038603
EXHIBIT G
TABLE OF CONTENTS
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
Association Issues and Program Report
Page
ADVOCACY OVERVIEW
X
2
3
3
4
ISSUES AND PROGRAM STATUS
III.
8
National Chemical Response and InformationCenter (NCRIC)............ 30
Plant Management and Design (Engineering Codes& Standards)... 36
International Regulatory Issues (Health, Safety
DEPARTMENTAL PROGRAM NOTES
53
53
54
55
55
CMA
CMA 038604
REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
ASSOCIATION PROGRAM AND ISSUE REPORT
ADVOCACY OVERVIEW
Congress
The first session of the 99th Congress was an active one for both
the House and Senate on economic issues, but they did not reauthorize any
of the pending environmental laws.
Congress adopted the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings bill, a law which
requires a balanced budget by fiscal 1991 and requires Presidential
sequestration orders across the board on outlays and budget authority in
order to achieve intermediate deficit targets each year, if Congress and
the President do not meet deficit targets through legislative action each
year.
The House passed a comprehensive tax reform bill. The bill reduces
tax rates for individuals; increases the personal exemption and the
standard deduction for individuals; reduces real estate tax shelters;
repeals the investment tax credit; reduces five corporate brackets to
three and reduces the top corporate rate from 46 to 36 percent; reduces
the deductibility of business entertainment expenses to 80 percent of the
current level; establishes a broad-based 25 percent minimum tax for both
corporations and individuals and establishes less favorable depreciation
schedules.
Two bills in conference would reauthorize the Safe Drinking Water Act
through 1989; and authorize a total of $12 billion for sewage construction
grants and $9 billion for water pollution control through FY 1990.
Bills passed in differing forms by both the House and Senate and now
awaiting conference would reauthorize the Superfund Act. Many
controversial issues remain to be resolved including the funding level,
funding mechanism and program issues.
Congress passed the Textile and Apparel Trade Enforcement Act and
sent it to the President. It was vetoed on December 17, hours before it
would have become law without his signature. The bill was designed to
restrict and regulate textile imports, yet maintain a level of foreign
imports high enough to allow consumer choice.
Page
I
CMA 038606
The 1986 Congressional session is very unpredicatable at this time
because the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction law presents Congress
with many new challenges. Add to this the usual uncertainties of an
election year and 1986 will add up to another difficult year for the
Congress.
Federal Regulatory Agencies
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The agency is moving rapidly
to implement legislation under the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) and the
Research Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
Regulatory activities
under the SDWA are especially vigorous, and RCRA implementation during the
next quarter will be dynamic.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The recent decision by FDA to
classify the risk of cancer from methylene chloride exposure as de minimis
at a risk of one in a million is a major step away from the 2ero risk
concept. The decision is sure to be challenged, but it dramatizes a
growing awareness among federal agency administrators that adhering to
zero risk, even for carcinogens in food, is an unacceptable public policy.
It also adds another case to a growing set that endorses a lifetime risk
of one in a million as a future standard.
OSHA Special Chemical industry Program, on November 4, 1985, OSHA
established a pilot National Emphasis Program for programmed inspections
of chemical industry establishments. The program, which reflects
virtually all of CMA's comments of August 29, appears to represent a sound
approach. During the first year of the pilot program, eighty plant
programs will be inspected by qualified compliance officers who will
examine process safety and emergency response procedures.
Occupational Safety s Health Administration (OSHA). OSHA is also
completing its inspection check sheet for evaluating industry's worker
education and training programs. This program will become effective in
May 1986.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The Commission has
proposed a natural gaa block billing rule that could cost the chemical
industry $600 million a year if not modified.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The Secretary of Energy, John
Herrington, announced that DOE is developing options for natural gas
legislation that will serve as the basis for a new Administration bill for
deregulation. He indicated that an Administration bill is preferable to
endorsing any of the several gas bills pending, and their bill should be
ready for Congress in January 1986.
Page
2
CMA 038606
The DOE also plana to send National Energy Policy Plan V to Congress
m January. The plans are required every two years as updates of federal
energy policies.
States
Advocacy at any level of government depends on early warning, rapid
response and early involvement. Modern technology, ie. the computer, has
given us the opportunity to greatly enhance our early participation in the
political process. CMA State Affairs Division is now implementing our new
two-way computer communication system called CMA/LINC. Currently there
are 20 member companies and two state chemical industry councils actively
participating.
It should be noted, however, that many of the state CICs will need
additional funding for their effective participa tion in this vital
communications network. Member companies are strongly encouraged to
provide this needed support.
The state advocacy program* including the new CMA/LINC computer
network, will be heavily involved in 1986 in the critical environmental
issues identified by the National Conference of State Legislators, namely,
groundwater and the disposal of hazardous wastes. Of course, other issues
will continue to be of major concern such as state superfunds which are
currently under detailed study by the CMA State Hazardous
Waste/Groundwater Task Group.
State right-to-know action continues to grow and even expand in
scope. New Jersey's "Toxic Catastrophe Prevention Act", signed in early
January, not only requires the reporting of information concerning
industry's operations but also allows the state to order risk reduction
measures or even order the cessation of operations. Toxic air will become
even more important at the state level as Federal EPA pushes this issue
along with groundwater to the states. CMA's State Affairs program has
been an active participant in CMA's development of an air toxics policy.
A new, but rapidly growing issue at the state and federal level is
liability insurance and the related issue of tort reform. CMA's State
Affairs program is actively participating in a large coalition of
interested trade associations and individual companies under the auspices
of the American Legislative Exchange Council. Nearly all states are
involved in some aspect of this issue. Of course, hazardous material
transportation, public compensation and chronic health issues will
continue to be active issues as well in 1986.
Media
Page
3
CMA 038607
The closing months of 1985 saw concentrated media attention on the
subject of air toxics. The first anniversary of Bhopal and related
activities of environmental groups, the EPA hazardous chemicals listing
and, in depth media analysis, made headlines at the same time.
Reauthori2ation of Superfund probably gained more media attention
than expected, primarily because of its intrusion into the budget
reconciliation process. Most of this attention was in the form of news
rather than editorial coverage.
1985 - as might have been anticipated following the December 1984
Bhopal accident - became a year of intense environmental inquiry. Initial
interest was in the potential for acute incidents in the United States.
Stories focused on questions of failure to regulate or inadequacy of
existing law. For the media, the Institute, W.V. release answered the
question "can it happen here?" Attention to "acute" threats accelerated in
their Bhopal retrospective. Media from chemical states such as Texas,
Louisiana, west Virginia, Illinois, Ohio and Pennsylvania were concerned
primarily about this issue — with questions about training, process
safety and design. New Jersey attention included "chronic" issues as well
as "acute," raising the idea of affect on communities, as opposed to
workers.
For the most part our activities relating to Superfund were
proactive. Bhopal/air toxics activities were responsive.
The national media appeared to understand the chemical industry
rationale for a broad based tax and generally referred to that position in
their coverage,
in addition, those reporters who have covered the story
over a period of time agree with the industry contention that a waste
generation tax bears little relationship to hazardous waste sites.
Courts and Agency Decisions
Federal Maritime Commission. A victory I CMA, through briefs and
affidavits, convinced an Administrative Law Judge to decide that two
chemical parcel tankers were "tramps" rather than "ocean conanon carriers”
and thus exempt from antitrust laws. While this decision is likely to be
appealed to the entire Commission, it may serve as a precedent to prevent
chemical parcel tankers from obtaining antitrust exemptions for price
setting and market allocation agreements. Those activities could cost the
chemical industry 200 million dollars per year in increased rates on bulk
chemical exports and imports.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Another victoryl The Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has approved a rule on natural gas
Page
4
CMA 038608
transportation that adopts many CMA recommendations. The rule (Order No.
436) is intended to promote competition in the natural gas market by
facilitating the movement of gas from the producer to the user. When
fully implemented by the pipelines, there will be a substantial cost
savings to industrial users of gas. The annual savings for CMA members is
estimated at $300 to $750 million.
In addition, CMA and its coalition partners successfully argued
against inclusion of a new block billing mechanism in the final rule. CMA
testified that block billing would significantly raise the price of
natural gas for industrial consumers. A study submitted by CMA indicated
that annual cost to the chemical industry would be approximately $660
million. FERC's action is a major victory for CMA and other industrial
users. However, the Commission is continuing its assessment of the
advantages and disadvantages of block billing and further action is still
possible.
II. ISSUES AND PROGRAM STATUS
Hazardous Waste (Superfund)
Congressional Developments and Response
Senate Activity
The Senate passed H.R. 2005 on September 26, the Superfund
reauthorization for five years. The legislation will increase nearly
fivefold the money available to clean up abandoned hazardous waste sites
by freezing the feedstock tax and imposing a broad-based excise tax on all
manufacturers.
Senator Robert Packwood (R-OR) and other members of the Finance
Committee put the Superfund funding package in the budget reconciliation
bill which passed the Senate. Senator Jesse Helms (R-NC) offered an
amendment to delete the Superfund funding from the budget reconciliation
legislation, but he lost 66 to 32. The Senate, once again, strongly
confirmed its support for a broad-based tax and freezing feedstock to
finance the Superfund cleanup program.
House Activity
The House voted 391-33 on Dec. 10 to reauthorize the Superfund
cleanup program by significantly increasing the tax of chemical feedstocks
and oil. The House narrowly defeated the Ways & Means Committee's
broad-based tax which was opposed by President Reagan, most of the unions,
the environmentalists, and a broad coalition of manufacturers, with this
Page
5
CMA 038609
support, the House passed Representatives Thomas Downey's (D-NY) and Bill
Frenzel's (R-MN) amendment, 220-206, to finance the bulk of the S10.3
billion Superfund from a $2 billion tax on chemical feedstocks, S3.1
billion from a crude oil tax, $2 billion from a waste tax, SI.6 billion
from general revenues and smaller amounts from other sources.
The program provisions were a compromise of the Energy & Commerce and
Public Works & Transportation Committees proposals. They include cleanup
schedules, cleanup standards, citizen suits, settlement procedures and
right-to-know provisions including a requirement that certain companies
report annually their total releases of chemicals that can cause chronic
health hazards. The House defeated an amendment to create a federal cause
of action. Thus, neither the House or Senate bill contains victims
compensation provisions, which was a key CMA priority in Superfund
reauthorization.
The House and Senate conference on Superfund reauthorization could
begin in late January, after the conferees have been appointed. But major
concerns need to be resolved on the funding level, mechanism and program
issues. One of the major program issues to be resolved in conference is
how much discretion to give EPA. The House bill spells out in great
detail what EPA should do and when to do it, where the Senate bill
provides more general guidance.
The Superfund Task Group of CMA's Government Relations Committee will
now focus its attention on the House and Senate conferees. A strategy
will be developed and agressively implemented on the tax and program
issues.
Before Congress adjourned for the year on December 20, they made one
last effort to provide funding for the Superfund program. On December 13
the House and Senate conference on budget reconciliation began to consider
the Superfund funding issues. They agreed on a compromise of the Senate
funding mechanism (freeze feedstocks and a broad-based tax) and the House
funding level of $10 billion over five years. But when the conference
report went back to the House for approval, Represenative Dan Rostenkowski
(D-IL) successfully moved to strike the Superfund provisions because of
the broad-based tax. Until Congress ajoumed December 20 without passing
budget reconciliation, the House continued to delete Superfund and the
Senate kept insisting Superfund be included. This deadlock over the
different funding approaches approved by the House and Senate signals how
difficult the funding issue will be to resolve in 1986.
Regulatory Developments and Response
National Priority List Comments. The EMC's Superfund Implementation
Task Group submitted comments to EPA on proposed amendments to the
National Priority List. The primary CMA concern was EPA's retaining
flexibility in requiring cleanups under Superfund or RCRA. we indicated
Page
6
CMA 038610
that mandating that all cleanups be governed by one statute may be unduly
rigid and, in fact, slow down the cleanup process.
Policy Development, Analytical and Program Activities
National Contingency Plan Litigation. The EMC authorized CMA to
intervene in litigation challenging EPA's revisions to the National
Contingency Plan. CMA's concerns are:
(1) EPA including technology
standards in addition to health-based standards for purposes of
determining what are relevant cleanup standards; (2) EPA establishing
cost-effectiveness criteria inconsistent with the statute; and (3) EPA
incorporating other regulatory Agency standards for purposes of defining
the relevant cleanup standards that go beyond the statute's requirements.
Communications
Nearly all of the News Service Division's efforts and resources were
dedicated to Superfund during the October to December period. Briefings
on Superfund issues for key media continued during the period, and were
concentrated on Washington correspondents for the following newspapers and
news organizations: Associated Press, Dow Jones News Service, Charleston
(W.V.) Daily Mail, Ottaway News Service, Detroit (Mich.) Free Press,
Scripps-Howard News Services, USA Today, Wall Street Journal, Chicago
Tribune, Chicago Sun-Times, Cong~-3sional Quarterly, Newhouse News
Service, and Gannett News Service.
During the last eight months of 1985, CMA officers, member-company
representatives and association staff have participated in 133 briefings
on Superfund issues in more than 70 cities.
Television and radio activity increased during the period on
Superfund issues, especially during November and December. CMA made
extensive use of its "alternative TV network," providing specially
targeted newsfeeds to key Congressional districts. Subjects covered in
the newsfeeds included the economic impact of Downey Superfund funding
proposal on chemical producers; propriety of Ways and Means Committee passed version of Superfund funding; and identification of industries
which have contributed waste to Superfund sites - that pay no Superfund
taxes. Targeted TV newsfeeds were distributed in nearly 40 key
Congressional districts. Usage, depending on the subject, ran between 26%
and 75%. Market reach of the targeted newsfeeds ranged from 1.9 million
to 4.5 million people.
Radio newsfeeds were also produced on similar Superfund issues during
the period. Usage averaged nearly 60%.
The department also assisted in preparation of written materials for
the Government Relations Staff for use during House Superfund floor
debates.
Page
7
CMA 038611
Immediately prior to the House vote on Superfund the department
prepared and placed a full page advertisement in the Washington Post
urging members to vote NO on the Downey Amendment.
EPA is distributing "Cleaning Up" (CMA's waste site cleanup film) to
its regional offices for use in community relations programs. The film
has been distributed to more than 60 television stations. More than 110
prints have been sold to CMA member companies for use in community and
employee relations programs. CMA's Community Information Task Group is
launching a film distribution plan that includes CIC involvement, personal
television contacts, publicity, national platforms for screening and
promoting the film.
Hazardous Waste Management (RCRA)
Regulatory Developments and Response
Land Ban Prohibitions.
In early January, EPA will propose its first
set of rules to prohibit the disposal of many hazardous wastes in or on
the ground. Land disposal will be prohibited unless the level of of the
hazardous constituents in the waste is less than the "health based
standard" EPA will establish for over 350 hazardous constituents, or the
"best available technology" is used to treat the waste to reduce the
hazards. The RCRA Regulations Task Group will prepare comments on this
important and lengthy new rule.
Inorganic Leaching Model. On November 27, 1985, EPA issued a final
rule adopting a model that predicts the leaching, migration and
persistence of inorganic wastes in the land. EPA will use the model to
determine which inorganic materials should be listed/delisted as hazardous
wastes. The model, with some variations, will also be used to determine
which inorganic wastes will be banned from land disposal. The RCRA
Regulations Task Group commented on the proposed rule, and is reviewing
the final rule to determine whether to challenge it in court.
Organic Leaching Model. On November 27, 1985, EPA proposed a model
for predicting the leaching, migration, and persistence or organic wastes.
The methodology and intended use of the organic model is similar to the
inorganic model discussed above. The RCRA regulations Task Group is
preparing comments for filing on January 13, 1985.
Burning of Hazardous Waste in Boilers. CMA will participate in a
Keystone workshop on January 28, 1985 regarding the issue of burning
hazardous waste in boilers. A consensus may emerge that could form the
basis of a rule EPA is developing to regulate this activity. The Boiler
Work Group has prepared a regulatory proposal that CMA will present at the
Page
8
CMA 038612
Workshop. The proposal divides hazardous waste burning into three
categories with greater regulation for fuel that contains the largest
percentage of hazardous waste.
Policy Development, Analytical and Program Activities
1984 Hazardous Waste Survey. The EMC's RCRA Regulations Task Group
has published the results of the 1984 Hazardous Waste Survey of member
companies. The 1984 results show a continuing trend of decreased reliance
on landfills for disposal of hazardous waste, but an increased reliance on
incinerators for disposal. The survey trend analysis compares disposal
practices for the years 1981-1984.
1985 Hazardous Waste Survey. The EMC has authorized the RCRA
Regulations Task Group to conduct a 1985 Hazardous waste Survey of member
companies. The survey to be completed later in 1986, will provide CMA
with the most recent data on the waste disposal practices of the member
companies. The raw data and trends analyses are valuable advocacy tools
for legislative and regulatory matters concerning hazardous waste
management.
RCRA Codification Rule Litigation. The EMC authorized CMA to
intervene in litigation challenging EPA's regulations designed to codify
many of the new requirements of the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments
of 1984. These regulations cover the bulk liquid ban, minimum
technological requirements, the continuing releases provision, the interim
small quantity generator provisions, the preconstruction ban, the
labelling requirements for hazardous waste fuels, the recordkeeping
requirements for hazardous waste exports, the waste minimize provisions,
and collection systems and groundwater monitoring provisions. Although
these requirements were supposed to merely codify statutory language, the
final regulations either added provisions and/or deleted certain limiting
factors.
Supreme Court Hazardous Waste Siting Litigation. The EMC has
authorized CMA filing an amicus brief in the U.S. supreme Court’s
consideration of a local ordinance banning all permanent on-site disposal
facilities within the City of Fairmont, w. Va. The questions to be
addressed by the Court are whether RCRA preempts a local ordinance's
prohibition of all disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to a federal
permit and can a locality prohibit all hazardous waste disposal within its
borders. The resolution of this case will have a long-term impact on the
way industry plans/manages its wastes.
Burning in Boilers Position Paper. The EMC approved a revised
position paper concerning regulation of the burning of hazardous wastes in
industrial boilers. The revisions reflect the 1984 Hazardous and Solid
Waste Amendments. The revised position paper will be used to respond to
EPA's anticipated proposed regulation of the burning of hazardous wastes
Page
9
CMA 038613
in industrial boilers.
In addition, the position paper will be used in a
CMA sponsored Keystone Conference on burning hazardous wastes in
industrial boilers. Industry, government, and environmental
representatives have been invited to participate in this consensus
development conference.
Underground Injection Control Project
EPA Regulatory Issues. The Underground Injection Control Task Group
developed a list of regulatory issues EPA needs to resolve as part of the
regulatory development process for land disposal ban decisions of
hazardous wastes disposed by underground injection. The resolution of
many of these issues may have a direct impact on whether or not certain
wastes will ultimately be allowed to be disposed by underground injection.
The questions address technical, legal, and policy issues.
UIPC Sponsored Regulatory Negotiations. CMA's Underground Injection
Control Group has been invited to participate in a Underground Injection
Practices Council (UIPC) exploratory meeting to determine if the RCRA land
disposal ban applicable to underground injection of hazardous wastes issue
is appropriate for regulatory negotiations. The initial meeting is to
determine if enough regulatory issues exist that are amenable to
meaningful and successful negotiations. A fundamental question to be
resolved at the exploratory meeting is whether all concerned parties are
willing to participate in a negotiation activity.
Litigation and Related Activities
Definition of Solid waste. CMA is challenging in the Court of
Appeals EPA's January 5, 1985 rule defining solid waste to include
materials resulting from a manufacturing process or used in a
manufacturing process that are reclaimed and reused in a "closed-loop"
manner in thd same manufacturing process. This rule would subject to the
panoply of RCRA regulation an estimated 3000 to 5000 tanks used by CMA
members in their manufacturing operations. As part of the litigation, CMA
has convinced EPA to propose an amendment to its rules that would exclude
this "closed-loop" reclamation from EPA jurisdiction. EPA proposed such
an amendment on December 16, 1985 and CMA will file comments supporting
the amendment.
Codification Rule/Corrective Action. CMA has intervened in a
challenge to EPA'S July 15, 1985 rule codifying the 1984 RCRA Amendments.
The challenge involves, among other issues, the question of to what extent
must owners of waste facilities repair the environment damaged by prior
releases. CMA is monitoring the litigation and may participate in
settlement negotiations with EPA aimed at clarifying the rule.
Air
I
Page
10
CMA 038614
Congressional Developments and Response
House Activity. The House-passed Superfund legislation contains a
community right-to-know amendment sponsored by Rep. Bob Edgar (D-PA),
including air emissions reporting requirements.
(See further description
under "Right-to-Know".) The Edgar amendment - even if altered in
conference - will affect future air toxics legislation.
Currently the only full-scale air toxics bill is H.R. 2576, which
Rep. Henry Waxman (D-CA) introduced. Since Waxman held hearings on H.R.
2576 last June, he has been preoccupied with Superfund, and other issues.
In fact Waxman actively supported and worked for the Edgar amendment.
Early in 1986, Waxman reportedly plans to resume efforts toward full
scale air toxics legislation. This could mean additional hearings,
changes in H.R. 2576, or new proposals. In anticipation, Rep. John
Dingell (D-MI) continues to collect information and data from EPA and
other sources regarding air emissions and control.
CMA will address the Edgar amendment in the House and Senate
conference on Superfund, and is preparing for additional air toxics
activity in 1986.
Senate Activity. The Senate-passed Superfund legislation also
contains community right-to-know emission reporting requirements including
air emissions. CMA also will address this provision, sponsored by Senator
Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ), in the conference on Superfund.
There have been no Senate hearings or full scale air toxics
proposals; however. Senate hearings on acid rain began in December 1985,
and air toxics may be the next topic in the Environment & Public Works
Committee.
Regulatory Developments and Response
Chromium Comments. The EMC's Process Emission Regulations Task Group
submitted comments to EPA on the Agency's notice of intent to list
chromium and hexavalent chromium as hazardous air pollutants. CMA's
comments focused on the technical adequacy of exposure assessments
conducted by EPA and the use of chromium in cooling towers and the need
for more technical analyses on whether the chromium emissions result in
ambient problems.
Emissions Trading Policy Petition. CMA, in conjunction with other
industry groups, has petitioned EPA to publish an emissions trading policy
more in line with the original intent negotiated between EPA and parties
challenging an earlier EPA air emissions policy. The most recent draft of
Page
11
CMA 038615
an air emissions trading policy appeared to fundamentally change course
and undercut the utility of an emissions trading policy. The goal of the
industry petition is to persuade EPA to publish an emissions trading
policy that facilitates industry growth and protects the environment.
Secondary Emissions Comments. The EMC's Process Qnission Regulations
Task Group submitted comments to EPA on a technical report on developing a
program of air regulations at hazardous waste treatment, storage and
disposal facilities. CMA's comments focused on technical aspects of
estimating air emissions from hazardous waste disposal sites. The
comments are designed to assist in developing better and more accurate
predictive models for estimating air emissions from the units comprising
waste disposal facilities.
Policy Development, Analytical and Program Activities
i
Recommended Air Toxics Legislative Principles. The EMC has approved
recommended principles for addressing federal and state air toxics
legislation. The recommended principles address both routine emissions
and accidental emissions. The principles, if adopted by the Board of
Directors, will be used in developing CMA's air toxics legislative
advocacy programs at the federal and state level.
Proposed Air Toxics Control Policy. The EMC has assisted members of
the Executive Committee in developing a proposed air toxics control
policy. As part of this activity, EMC members drafted initial versions of
the air toxics control policy, and identified various options on how such
a policy could be implemented by CMA member companies.
If approved by
CMA's Board of Directors, the EMC plans a significant education and
technical program to assist the member companies in implementing the air
toxics control policy.
Litigation and Related Activities
Benzene Litigation. CMA has submitted its brief in a court suit
brought by the Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.
(NRDC) challenging
EPA's emission standards for benzene under section 112 of the Clean Air
Act. The case revolves around the "ample margin of safety" test of
section 112. NRDC contends that EPA is required to set "zero-risk, zero
emission" standards for all carcinogens. CMA and the American Petroleum
Institute, who also is a party, are arguing in support of EPA's position
that the Agency is authorized to take cost and feasibility into account in
setting emission standards.
Radionuclides Litigation. On January 13, CMA filed its brief in a
case involving emission standards for radionuclides. This case, which
raises issues similar to those in the benzene litigation, focuses on the
"ample margin of safety" test of Section 112 of the Clean Air Act. NRDC
again argues that EPA must set "zero-risk, zero emission" standards for
Page
12
CMA 038616
r
I
I
all carcinogens. CMA counters that EPA has flexibility under the statute
to consider cost and feasibility in setting emission standards.
Vinyl Chloride Litigation. CMA previously intervened in a court suit
brought by NRDC challenging EPA's emission standards for vinyl chloride.
This case probably will be the first to decide the meaning of the "ample
margin of safety" test in section 112 of the Clean Air Act. All briefs
have been filed and a decision is expected this spring.
Communications
The department prepared a summary and question and answer document on
the Dingell Survey.
Surface Water
Congressional Developments and Response
Conference on Clean Water Act Amendments. Conference on the Senate
and House versions of S. 1128 may occur before conference on Superfund.
The timing depends upon resolution of the controversy over construction
grants funding, which is not an issue of direct concern to CMA.
CMA's five major issues, on which the Clean Water Act Task Group has
begun distributing technical papers and discussing improvements needed by
the conferees, are the following:
o
Compliance Deadlines - CMA supports the House version applying a 3 1/2
years deadline.
o
Penalties - CMA supports the House version providing for administrative
penalty hearing (APA) procedures; fairer size of maximum administrative
civil penalties; citizen suit preclusion relative to administrative
penalties; fairer size of maximum judicial civil penalties; and,
affirmative defense protection against criminal penalties.
o
Fundamentally Different Factors (FDF) Variances - CMA supports the
House version allowing use of FDF compared to the almost totally
restrictive Senate version.
o
Post-Best Available Technology (BAT) Requirements - CMA prefers the
Senate version providing more time and state responsibility.
o
Storm water Permits - CMA supports the House version which better
targets the types of discharges that should be permitted and provides
for a better regulatory program.
Regulatory Developments and Response
Page
13
CMA 038617
OCPSF Effluent Guidelines Comments. EMC's Effluent Guidelines Task
Group developed comprehensive comments on EPA’s proposed revisions to the
organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers (OCPSF) effluent
guidelines. CMA's comments highlight technical problems in EPA's
regulatory proposals and offer constructive alternatives to achieve the
same environmental results. CMA's comments concentrate on EPA's failure
to reflect the high levels of waste water treatment already in existence
and the enormous additional costs that might be imposed with minimal
environmental benefit to meet the proposed limits. Representatives of CMA
and its member companies met with EPA's Assistant Administrator for water
and discussed CMA's concern with the proposed revisions to the OCPSF
effluent guidelines.
Stormwater Permit Regulations Comments. EMC's Water Permits Task
Group submitted comments to EPA on proposed revisions to the NPDES
stormwater regulations. CMA comments indicate general support for EPA's
"general permit" approach, but offers several modifications to remedy some
industry concerns. CMA representatives discussed our recommedations with
EPA staff during the comment period. Generally, the proposed revisions,
if modified in the final regulations, will be a reasonable stormwater
regulatory requirement.
Priority Pollutant Listing/Delisting Comments. The EMC's Water
Quality Criteria and Standards Task Group, in conjunction with the
Phthalate Esters Panel, has developed comments on EPA's report
establishing a ranking list of Section 307(a) priority pollutants. The
report offers industry an opportunity to delist certain chemicals from the
Section 307(a) priority list and subsequent regulation under various Clean
Water Act provisions. The Phthalate Esters Panel has been actively
involved in this project because the EPA draft technical publication
concerning phthalate esters expressly allowed a delisting procedure.
EPA Biomonitoring Studies Comments. EMC's Water Quality Criteria and
Standards Task Group submitted comments to EPA on a recent biomonitoring
study involving the Kanawah River. CMA's comments addressed several
scientific and technical deficiencies with the study and offered
recommendations on how to cure several of them. The biomonitoring
activity is of special concern to many member companies since EPA regional
offices are incorporating biomonitoring requirements as part of second
round NPDES permits.
Litigation and Related Legal Activities
Stormwater Litigation. On August 29, EPA decided to make a major
change in the deadline for submitting stormwater permit applications under
the Clean Water Act. The original date had been April 26, 1985. However,
CMA and other industry groups mounted a major effort to convince EPA that
the deadline was unreasonable. CMA member companies participated in the
effort by contacting EPA and documenting the practical problems posed by
Page
14
CMA 038618
the deadline. On August 29, EPA agreed with our position, changing the
deadline to December 31, 1986 for industrial (Group I) discharges and June
30, 1987 for other (Group II) discharges. However, the Natural Resources
Defense Council (NRDC) has now filed suit challenging the deadline
extension. Since the extension is very important to industry and rests
substantially upon concerns brought to EPA's attention by industry, CMA
and the other trade associations that have been involved with the
stormwater issue have decided to intervene in NRDC's case, in support of
EPA . we will jointly present the argument that EPA was justified in
extending the deadline in order to remedy serious practical defects in the
original stormwater regulations.
Pesticides Effluent Guidelines Litigation. On October 4, EPA issued
effluent guidelines and standards under the Clean Water Act for the
pesticides industry. Because of the strong connections between the
pesticides and organic chemicals industries, several generic regulatory
issues addressed in the pesticides rules are also important in the ongoing
rulemaking for the organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers
(OCPSF) industry. CMA has therefore decided to participate in litigation
on the pesticide regulations, since any judicial decision on those
questions in the pesticide context will surely serve as precedent for
EPA's regulation of OCPSF plants. In the litigation, CMA will be working
closely with other affected industry groups and companies to coordinate
efforts and, to the extent possible, present a united industry position on
the important issues to be briefed.
Groundwater (Includes Safe Drinking Water Act)
Congressional Developments and Response
JSafe Drinking Water
Congress is expected to give final approval early in 1986 to a Safe
Drinking Water Act reauthorization that would significantly strengthen the
federal law that protects the quality of drinking water.
On May 16, the Senate approved by voice vote a Senate bill (S. 124)
sponsored by Senator Dave Durenberger (R-MN). On June 17, the House by
voice vote approved a House proposal (H.R. 1650) introduced by Rep.
Edward R. Madigan (R-IL). Both bills would set deadlines for the
Environmental Protection Agency to regulate drinking water contaminants,
require monitoring for unregulated contaminants, and establish a
demonstration program for planning to protect aquifers that are the sole
or principal source of a community's drinking water.
After the early action the House and Senate conference was delayed
repeatedly because staff and members were busy with Superfund, clean water
and other issues.
Staffers remain optimistic that differences over
Page
IS
CMA 038619
standard-setting, groundwater, judicial review and funding provisions will
be resolved. The House bill would require states to develop and adopt
plans to protect all present and potential underground sources of drinking
water. Also, the House bill has significantly lower authorization levels.
EPA objects to most of the main provisions of both bills, arguing they
would lessen the agency's discretion and are unnecessary.
CMA has supported the Senate bill over the House version on three
issues: standard setting, no comprehensive groundwater protection
program, and the Senate critical aquifer demonstration program instead of
the House sole source.
Groundwater
Senator Dave Durenberger (R-MN) has held 6 hearings leading toward
the introduction of his groundwater protection bill early in 1986.
Senators George Mitchell (D-ME) and Max Baucus (D-MT) introduced
their groundwater protection bill on November 7, 1985, S. 1836, primarily
to begin the discussions in the groundwater debate. This bill would
require states to have their own groundwater protection programs and to
establish groundwater quality standards, with assistance from the Federal
Government. CMA is currently working on an analysis of the
Mitchell/Baucus bill.
The National Groundwater Policy Forum, led by Gov. Bruce Babbitt of
Arizona, announced its legislative recommendations. These
recommendations, together with Senator Mitchell's and Senator
Durenberger's bills, will likely serve as the initial focal point for the
groundwater legislative debate next year. CMA is in the process of
completing an analysis of the Forum's proposal.
Regulatory Developments and Response
EPA Health Advisories Comments. The EMC's Groundwater Management
Task Group submitted comments to EPA on the Agency's generic approach to
health advisories and detailed comments on 25 chemical-specific health
advisories. CMA's comments identified concerns and deficiencies with
several assumptions, inclusion of some data, and specific health
advisories language. The final health advisories will be used in
developing drinking water criteria that will be used in developing state
drinking water standards.
Policy Development, Analytical and Program Activities
Recommended Maximum Contaminant Levels Litigation. The EMC
authorized CMA to participate in a judicial challenge of EPA's recently
published recommended maximum contaminant levels (RMCL). For several
Page
16
CMA 038620
substances, EPA has set the RMCL at zero. These limits are important
health-based standards that will serve as precedents for regulation of
many chemicals used or manufactured by member companies. The EMC's
Groundwater Management Task Group has identified several serious technical
flaws in EPA's standard setting methodology, and in the Agency's
interpretation and use of scientific information.
Litigation and Related Legal Activities
Safe Drinking Water Act RMCL Litigation. On November 13, EPA
promulgated final Recommended Maximum Containment Levels (RMCL's) under
the Safe Drinking Water Act for eight volatile synthetic organic chemicals
(VOC's). These chemicals are benzene, vinyl chloride, trichlorethylene,
ethylene dichloride, carbon tetrachloride, vinylidene chloride, methyl
chloroform, and p-dichlorbenzene. While the RMCL's are technically only
non-enforceable health goals,•they have critical importance for the
chemical industry, primarily because they are often used as the standards
of acceptable groundwater quality in Superfund cleanups, RCRA permitting
decisions, and state groundwater management programs.
In setting the
eight VOC RMCL's,EPA followed a strategy which resulted in the RMCL's for
five VOC's being set at zero on the basis of finding of "probably
carcinogenicity." Moreover, it appears that EPA misinterpreted scientific
data in reaching several of its conclusions regarding carcinogenicity of
these VOC's. Because of these issues, and the importance of the RMCL's,
CMA has decided to participate in litigation challenging EPA's decisions.
CMA is coordinating its efforts with other industry groups that will also
be involved in the case.
Communications
The department is working with the State Affairs Task Group of the
Groundwater Management Committee to prepare an information brochure on
groundwater for use at the state level.
Regulation of Chemicals (TSCA and related)
Regulatory Developments and Response
Response to TSCA Section 4 Generic Testing issues. Positions on two
generic testing issues were developed by the Hazard Assessment Task
Group, with the intent that the positions be used in CMA discussions with
EPA or as CMA positions on proposed rules or legislative issues related
to tests.
o
Issuet Use of TSCA Section 4 to require the testing of substances
used as inert pesticide ingredients.
Position;
The Task Group concluded that EPA cannot justify
Page
17
CMA 038621
Section 4 test rules solely on the basis of use of a chemical
substance as a pesticide inert. A chemical substance would be
regulated under TSCA only up to the point in its life cycle where
it is incorporated into a pesticide formulation.
Subsequent to
its incorporation, the inert ingredient becomes part of a FIFRA
pesticide formulation and is regulated appropriately under FIFRA.
This CMA position was approved by the Health and Safety Committee
at their November meeting.
o
Issue;
Use of TSCA Section 4 to require monitoring for the
presence of chemical substances.
Position; EPA does not have the authority under Section 4 to
require monitoring or analytical tests because Section 4(a) is
limited to testing of the health and environmental effects of
chemical substances and mixtures.
Recognizing, however, that
reliable human and environmental exposure data may be necessary
for a sound assessment of risks presented by a chemical, CMA will,
as a matter of policy, work with EPA to to develop monitoring and
analytical information when it is needed. This position was
approved by the Health and Safety Conmittee at their December
meeting.
Quality Assurance. At the request of the Hazard Assessment Task
Group, CMA co-sponsored a conference in November with AIHC in Raleigh,
North Carolina, entitled "Managing Conduct and Data Quality of Toxicology
Studies." The conference was a joint industry-government sponsored
venture, and established a dialogue between toxicology testing groups in
government and industry. Quality assurance programs and GLP issues were
discussed. Proceedings will be forthcoming in 1986.
Comprehensive Reporting. On December 20, 1985, CMA filed comments on
the second draft of the form developed for the comprehensive assessment
information rule. Although the form was a, great improvement over the
first draft, CMA reiterated its recommendation that the Agency coordinate
the collection and management of data before implementing this broad
reporting rule. CMA will meet with the Agency as the proposed rule enters
Agency review in February.
New Chemical follow-up. The Conservation Foundation's Toxic
Substances Dialogue Group, of which CMA is a member, has recommended that
EPA implement a new approach to following the commercial development of
new chemicals. The procedure recommended by the Dialogue Group would
allow EPA to more easily follow, and if necessary regulate, changes in
manufacture or use that occur after a new chemical has been through Agency
review of the premanufacture notice and then manufactured for commercial
purposes. CMA and other members of the Dialogue Group will meet with EPA
in January to discuss the proposal.
Page
18
CMA 038622
EPA's Methods for Assessing Occupational Exposure.
The Health and
Safety Committee's Exposure Assessment Task Group reviewed and critiqued
EPA's methods for assessing occupational exposure to chemicals.
The
Exposure Assessment Task Group proposed modifications to dispersion
assessments, particularly in particle aerodynamics, to improve the
accuracy of EPA's assessments.
Evaluation of Exposure Assessment Methods.
The Exposure Assessment
Task Group has begun an evaluation of exposure assessment methods used by
government and industry.
The project will determine the validity and
appropriate uses of the assessment methods, and will improve the accuracy
of exposure assessments done as a part of the regulatory process.
The
evaluation will also highlight critical data gaps and assumptions.
These
can then be targeted as high priority research areas.
The evaluation of
exposure methods will make it less necessary to rely on "worst case"
assumptions in the exposure assessments that form the foundation of many
regulations.
Food and Drug Administration Syn^osium.
The Health and Safety
Committee's Risk Assessment Task Group provided scientific information to
the Food and Drug Administration's symposium on Interspecies Extrapolation
of Carcinogenicity Data.
The symposium identified scientific advances in
extrapolating laboratory experiments to human experience,
information
provided by the Risk Assessment Task Group included qualitative
extrapolation between species, factors that contribute to differences in
response between species, approaches that have been used in the past, and
potentially productive areas for future research.
Health and Safety Reporting.
On November 27, 1985, CMA submitted
comments to EPA on its proposals to amend the requirements for submitting
health and safety data under section 8(d) of TSCA.
CMA agreed that there
are circumstances that will justify extending the period of reporting for
certain chemicals, but objected to EPA's proposal to extend most reporting
from 3 years to 10 years.
CMA also took exceptions to EPA's proposal to
require companies to list studies that have already been submitted to
other offices within EPA.
For studies already submitted to other federal
agencies, we urged EPA to begin implementing the interagency coordination
provisions of section 10 of TSCA to relieve companies of the burden of
duplicative submissions.
Procedural Rules for Negotiated Testing.
In August, 1985, CMA and
the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) jointly submitted to EPA for
official approval a draft procedural rule to allow EPA and manufacturers
to negotiate toxicity testing requirements.
The draft was the product of
several meetings involving CMA, NRDC, and EPA staff.
Senior EPA officials
are now reviewing a final version that copies the draft almost exactly.
The final version is expected to be promulgated in February, 1986.
It
will re-establish negotiations as a legitimate procedure for deciding what
Page
19
CMA 038623
testing needs to be done.
It also represents the occasional value of
direct discussion with a national environmental organization.
Biotechnology Developments.
CMA staff counsel, as well as several
member company representatives, are participating in a Keystone Center
dialogue on the regulation of biotechnology.
The initial meeting at
Keystone occurred in October; others are planned for winter, spring, and
summer of 1986.
In the meantime, on November 14, 1985, the Office of
Science and Technology Policy announced the creation of a Biotechnology
Science Coordinating Committee within OSTP to coordinate among federal
agencies and promote consistent policies.
More recently , Senators
Durenburger (R-MN) and Baucus (D-MT) introduced S.
1967, The Biosafety
Act, which would amend the Toxic Substances Control Act to establish a
permit system for genetically engineered microorganisms and to give a
statutory charter to the Biotechnology Science Coordinating Committee.
International Regulation
U.S./Sweden Consultations.
On October 22-23, 1985, the
International Affairs Group (IAG) participated as industry
advisors to the U.S. Governmental Delegation at bilateral
consultations with the Swedish Government on its "New Act on
Chemical Products in Sweden".
The consultations were held in
Stockholm.
IAG had previously submitted comments on the New
Act to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR).
The comments address a number of chemical notification, testing,
confidentiality and labeling issues, as well as suggested
amendments on cheaiical inventory compilation and exemptions from
notification.
Consultations with Japanese on Chemical Testing.
On
November 19, 1985, the IAG met with a Japanese Delegation
(from Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)
and the Japan Chemical Industry Assiciation (JCIA)) to
discuss the forthcoming revisions to the Japanese Chemical
Substances Control Law.
The central issue of the agenda was
whether Japan will adopt a base-set (European style) test
requirement or adopt a case-by-case philosophy (TSCA style)
for testing of new chemicals.
The Japanese chemical industry
privately opposes the base-set philosophy but yields to the
Government and the academic proponents of such a requirement.
As a consequence of our meeting, a detailed text was prepared
and submitted formally by members of the Dow Japan staff to MITI,
summarizing IAG's concerns and recommendations against the
adoption of the base set approach in Japan.
Page
20
CMA 038624
European Community Preparations Directive.
The IAG has
submitted its views to the U.S. Government regarding the European
Council's Directive Relating to the Classification, Packaging and
Labeling of Dangerous Preparations.
Aided by counsel, a cooperative
effort between IAG and the Health and Safety Committee has yielded
a set of comments which were submitted to USTR, the Departments of
State and Commerce, and EPA on January 7, 1986.
The comments
relate to confidentiality, labeling and product liability concerns
with the Directive, as well as the economic burdens of compliance
on the chemical industry.
Australian Chemical Law.
The IAG will address new developments
on the Australian Chemical Registration Law which have been under
consideration for several months and appear to be in a nearly
finalized form that should be published within the next three
months.
Public Compensation
(Risk, Health and related issues)
Congressional Developments and Response
House Superfund Activity.
On December 10, the House of
Representatives defeated an amendment to add a federal cause of action to
the Superfund reauthorization bill.
The amendment, offered by
Representative Barney Frank (D-MA), would have allowed claimants to sue in
federal court for health or property damage allegedly caused by exposure
to hazardous wastes.
Companies- sued would have been absolutely liable for
any damages.
The House vote assures that the Superfund reauthorization bill will
not include a public compensation provision.
In considering its version
of a Superfund bill two months earlier, the Senate voted against
establishing a compensation fund as part of a "demonstration program." The
House and Senate votes are a significant victory for CMA, which actively
worked to prevent passage of a costly new compensation program.
Product Liability.
CMA submitted comments on the second draft (Staff
working Draft #2) of the product liability bill circulated by Senate
Commerce Committee Chairman John Danforth (R-MO.) These comments commend
Senator Danforth for seeking product liability reform and for
incorporating many of the suggestions offered to the previous draft.
Nevertheless, Staff Draft #2 remains seriously flawed.
The principle
problem is with causation.
A new presumption (a 30% increase in the
incidence of a disease establishes causation) would impose liability even
though there is only a small chance of actual responsibility.
In
addition, the proposal lacks fundamental due process.
A determination of
causation by a newly created National Toxic Health Effects Panel would be
Page
21
CMA 038625
unreviewable and beyond the challenge of parties on either side.
Hearings
on the draft proposal are expected in late February or early March.
Insurance Issues Developments and Response
Environmental Liability Insurance.
CMA assisted in the preparation
of a report to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)
on environmental liability insurance.
The NAIC is an organization of
state insurance regulatory officials, with active participation by state
insurance commissioners.
The NAIC report deals with the background and history of the
environmental liability insurance problem, outlines the legislative and
judicial developments affecting the marketplace, and assesses current
market conditions.
CMA participation in the NAIC effort assured the
development of a fair and balanced report.
Work is now underway on the second phase of the project, which is to
make appropriate recommendations to the NAIC on how to address the
environmental liability insurance problem.
Occupational and Public Safety
Congressional Developments and Response
Worker Right-to-Know.
Rep. Joe Gaydos' (D-PA) Health and Safety
Subcommittee held additional hearings last October and November on his
High Risk Occupational Disease Notification and Prevention Act, H.R.
1309.
This bill would require the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) to establish a system for identifying, notifying
and preventing illness among workers who are exposed to increased risk of
occupational disease.
Medical experts from the Monsanto Co. and Dow Coming testified on
behalf of CMA October 9.
We supported the general goals of H.R. 1309 but
strongly opposed its specifics, especially its trigger mechanism for
determining "elevated risks" of occupational disease,
other industry
groups and the Administration testified and took a similar approach.
Backed by solid organized labor support, Mr. Gaydos still plans to
mark up the bill and report it from the subcommittee in the Spring of
1986.
A CMA technical task group is developing responsive positions that
can be used to work constructively with subcommittee members and their
staff.
Community Right-to-Know (RTK).
Last September, the Senate passed the
Superfund reauthorization bill, H.R. 2005, including community RTK
amendments sponsored by Senator Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ).
CMA and its
Page
22
CMA 038626
member companies worked with Lautenberg to achieve more practical
emergency response provisions generally consistent with our CAER
initiatives.
Also included were somewhat narrower hazardous substance
inventory emissions/discharge reporting requirements, which still need
more improvements in the conference.
On December 10, 1985, the House of Representatives passed its
Superfund reauthorization, H.R. 2817.
The community RTK requirements are
based on material safety data sheets, emergency response provisions are
basically consistent with the CMA CAER/NCRIC programs, and we supported
the essential features of those two provisions.
But a third element was
added:
emissions/discharge reporting.
We succeeded initially in limiting
th list of extremely toxic substances, for which such reporting would be
required, to only those substances so acutely toxic that their release
in any amount would present an imminent and substantial endangerment to
human health.
Also included was language permitting a company to utilize
reasonable estimates rather than expensive direct monitoring for meeting
the reporting requirements.
Eventually however, the list of extremely
toxic substances was broadened by a floor amendment sponsored by
Congressman Robert Edgar (D-PA) to include substances causing adverse
chronic health effects.
CMA has not argued that there is no need for any emissions/discharge
reporting.
However, we did contend that hastily adding"^sticiv-reporting to
Superfund would be premature and detract from the bill's main purpose:
the clean up of hazardous waste sites.
CMA worked with a coalition of
allied industry groups with a small business focus, led by the Synthetic
Organic Chemicals Association (SOCMA) in support of efforts by key
Congressmen John Dingell (D-MI), James Broyhill (R-NC) and Gene Snyder
Despite these efforts, which included state and local officials,
the International Association of Fire Chiefs, and the Administration (EPA
and the White House), the Edgar amendment finally prevailed on the House
floor by one vote margin:
211-210.
CMA will be working with the industry coalition to achieve reasonable
reporting criteria in the House/Senate Conference on Superfund.
Policy Development, Analytical and Program Activities
Safety Guides.
In response to requests from member companies, the
Health and Safety Committee, through its Safety Programs Task Group, is
updating CMA's discontinued Safety Guide series.
The revised publications
will assist member companies in addressing certain important safety
questions.
The revised publications will focus on safety techniques.
In
addition to new versions of sixteen of the original "Guides", new
documents on the storage and handling of hazardous substances and site
emergency response are being eagerly anticipated by CAER participants.
Process Safety Seminars.
HSC's Process Safety Analysis Task Group
Page
23
CMA 038627
has conducted two Process Safety Management seminars during the past
years, with the third scheduled for February 13, 1986.
These overviews of
programs and techniques have been uniformly well attended and
enthusiastically received.
The February presentation is being opened to
non-CMA participants; a large turnout of government regulatory agency
personnel is anticipated.
Revision of ANSI Z129.1;
Hazardous Industrial Chemicals Precautionary Labeling.
The Labeling Task Group of the Health and Safety
Committee began its revision of the ANSI Standard on precautionary
labeling in the fall of 1985.
Among the additions to be incorporated in
the voluntary standard are chronic hazard language and symbol
recommendations.
The Projected date of completion is early 1987.
Litigation and Related Legal Activities
New Jersey Right-to-Know Litigation.
On October 11, 1985, the Third
Circuit Court of Appeals issued a decision in the appeal of a district
court decision.
The Court held the hazard communication standard
preempted the New Jersey Right-to-Know law as it applied to manufacturers.
In January of 1985, Judge Dickinson Debevoise rendered the preemption
decision in New Jersey State Chamber of Commerce v, Hughey.
The Court of
Appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part, the district court
decision.
The Court held:
(1) the hazard communication standard preempts the New Jersey law as it
pertains to protection of employee health safety in the manufacturing
sector;
(2) there is no preemption insofar as the New Jersey law applies to
employers outside the manufacturing sector or insofar as it requires
identification and reporting of environmental hazards;
(3) the Court remanded to the district court the question of whether
the environmental hazard labeling requirements are subject to implied
preemption; and
(4) upheld the New Jersey law's trade secret of protection.
The Court said its holding in United Steelworkers v. Auchter compels
a ruling that the hazard communication standard preempts the New Jersey
law with respect to disclosure to employees in the manufacturing sector.
The question left unresolved by the Steelworkers decision is to what
extent the other provisions of the New Jersey law are preempted by the
hazard communication standard.
The Court also said other provisions could be preempted under the
doctrine of implied preemption: (1) if it is impossible to comply with
Page
24
CMA 038628
both federal and state requirements, or (2)
Congressional purpose.
if enforcement will thwart
The questions remanded to the district court have not yet been
answered.
Although parties have held a pretrial conference, a decision on
the issue of environmental labeling requirements is not expected in the
near future.
Community Awareness and Emergency Response
Regulatory Developments and Response
On December 17, 1985, the Environmental Protection Agency officially
released its "Chemical Emergency Preparedness Program Interim Guidance"
Along with the guidance document, EPA released a list of 402
acutely toxic chemicals and chemical profiles.
This voluntary program is
"intended to help local communities become aware of any acutely toxic
chemicals in their area and prepare to respond to any accidental release
of such chemicals into the air." The agency will accept written comments
on the CEPP for a 90 day period.
CMA task groups will review the package
and comment to EPA.
While developing this program, the agency invited comments and advice
from CMA and others.
EPA included many of CMA's suggestions.
The overall
objectives of the program are compatible with CAER and will complement the
chemical industry's efforts by helping us implement our program,
in fact,
the agency guidance document specifically describes the CAER program and
looks to it as the industry's way of improving community contingency
planning.
CMA has distributed the guidance document, list of chemicals
^and chemical profiles to company CAER coordinators.
On November is, 1985, CMA participated in a national teleconference
with EPA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other federal
agencies.
The purpose of the teleconference was to describe EPA's CEPP,
CMA's CAER and other emergency response programs and to show how they can
work cooperatively.
Policy Development and Program Activity
On November 12, 1985, CMA President Roland sent a letter to executive
contacts of CMA member firms.
Roland asked the executive contacts to
do two things.
First to check with their CAER coordinator to assure that
they have submitted initial milestone reports to CMA.
At that time, only
93 of the 174 participating companies had reported.
Second, he asked the
contacts to support their CAER coordinators and plant managers by making
sure they have the resources to make the program successful.
Also, he
recommended that the executive contacts make CAER a part of their
companies' operating procedures.
To date, 119 companies out of 174
Page
25
CMA 038629
participating in the program have reported.
Those companies have selected
over 1,100 sites to participate in CAER.
Over 50% of those sites have
initiated community coordinating groups.
The CAER Task Group is coordinating the program's implementation with
allied trade associations and others to broaden direct support for CAER.
In addition to meeting with the Council of Chemical Associations,
presentations were made to:
the National Association of Chemical
Distributors, the Chlorine Institute, the Chemical Marketing Research
Association, the Chamber of Commerce, and the American Petroleum
Institute.
Future meetings will include the Synthetic Organic Chemical
Manufacturers Association, the Chemical Specialties Manufacturers
Association, the National Paint and Coatings Association, and the National
Association of Towns and Townships.
International Aspects
World Environment Center.
The dialogue between the International
Affairs Group and the World Environment Center continues as to how best to
translate the CAER document into usable texts for Third World country
applications.
The IAG has discussed the possibility of working with Latin
American chemical industry associations to provide a Spanish translation
of CAER for Latin American use.
Outreach Activity
Several state chemical organizations working with CMA have held CAER
workshops;
Florida, California, Ohio and New Jersey have put on workshops
that have focused on local implementation of CAER.
These workshops have
typically included local industry and emergency response officials who
discussed CAER case histories.
The Texas and Michigan chemical industry
councils have scheduled CAER workshops for early 1986.
Communications
The 35-page briefing package, "One Year After Bhopal" , was
distributed to a mailing list of 1000.
The package reviews industry
initiatives to improve process safety, transportation safety, emergency
preparedness and community awareness of chemical risks and hazards.
An update on the progress of the industry on programs announced last
April - CAER and NCRIC - was sent to all editorial board contacts in
anticipation of possible editorials concerning a one year Bhopal
anniversary.
Material went to nearly 200 writers.
Chemical Product Distribution Advocacy
Congressional Developments and Response
Rage
26
CMA 038630
Hazardous Materials Transportation.
Reauthorization of the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act is gaining momentum within Congress.
Several
groups representing shipper, carrier, emergency response, and public
interests are all gearing their activities towards generating significant
changes to the existing legislation.
Three primary groups have emerged:
the Office of Technology Assessment's Hazardous Materials Committee; the
DOT'S Hazardous Materials Transportation Advisory Committee; and the
Hazardous Materials Coalition.
CMA is represented on all three groups.
CMA is concerned about the push to establish a federal fund for
emergency response training and equipment.
Local authorities are
generally the first on the scene of transportation accidents involving
hazardous products.
Their representatives claim that industry funding is
necessary to ensure that they are adequately equipped and trained to
properly respond to such emergencies.
The chemical industry has countered
with extensive voluntary resources to meet this need.
CMA has strongly supported the recommendations calling for regulatory
consistency among federal, state and local authorities over the
transportation of hazardous materials.
This national regulatory
consistency, coupled with increased enforcement, will contribute greatly
towards enhancing hazardous material transportation safety.
It will also
prove economical to industry in that compliance with only a single set of
requirements would be required.
The first reauthorization bill, H.R.
3779, sponsored by
Representative Gonzales, has been referred jointly to the House Committees
on Public works and Transportation, Energy and Commerce, and Ways and
Means.
It represents the worst case scenario.
The bill would establish a
,federal Emergency Response Fund financed by industry, and advanced
notification of shipment, registration and routing.
While referencing
uniformity of regulations, the bill does not explicitly call for uniform
federal, state and local transportation regulations.
CMA is determining
whether this bill will receive favorable consideration in Congress, and
will act accordingly.
Water Resources Development Act.
CMA submitted detailed comments to
Congress on the provisions of the Water Resources Development Act, S.1567,
regarding the imposition of an ad valorem tax on imports and exports.
Specifically, CMA called for Congress to impose a cap on the tax for all
exports and shipments between U.S.
ports.
Further, CMA urged Congress to
avoid double taxation for cargo unloaded and reloaded onto a vessel at the
same harbor
Conrail Acquisition.
CMA formally notified Congress that it supports
the transfer of Conrail to the public sector.
CMA expressed the position
that between the existing sale options, Morgan Stanley and Norfolk
Southern, the public offering advanced by the Morgan Stanley group comes
Page
27
CMA 038631
closest to satisfying the chemical industry's concerns, provided Conrail
operates consistent with the language and spirit of the new Ex Parte 445
rules of the ICC that promote rail-to-rail competition.
CMA explicitly opposed the transfer of Conrail to a major Eastern
Railroad.
Such action would reduce rail-to-rail competition to an
unacceptable level.
Shipping Act of 1984.
CMA is continuing to seek an amendment to the
Shipping Act of 1984 that would exclude all chemical parcel tankers from
the antitrust exemption to set rates and designate markets.
This would
eliminate case-by-case litigation on carrier action as was the case with
the recent decision in Andino/Flota.
(See Chemical Parcel Tankers in
Section J.5)
Cargo Liability Bills.
CMA is developing a position to support
legislation that would modify ocean cargo liability laws.
CMA favors
clarifying liability limits so that they apply to packaged units within a
container, not to the 40-foot container.
CMA also favors legislation
based on the Hamburg Rules since they encourage ship owners to take proper
care of cargo.
Regulatory Developments and Response
HM 196.
A new Work Group has been formed to coordinate efforts in
complying with this final DOT rule pertaining to the transportation of
chemicals that pose poison inhalation hazards.
Specific concerns the Work
Group will address include:
types of packings that can be used to
transport these materials; information required by DOT to obtain approval
for these packagings; short acute toxicity data; and the determination of
which materials need additional toxicity testing.
The work group will
also explore the feasibility of sharing the cost of this testing.
Rail To Rail Competition.
The Interstate Commerce Commission has
published its new rules pertaining to competitive access of railroads to
shipping facilities.
These new rules reflect the major points agreed to
and submitted by CMA and the rail industry.
In the first test of the Commission's new rules, the Midtec Case has
been reopened.
It will address the Use of Terminal Facilities and
Reciprocal Switching arrangements by a competing railroad.
To ensure the
chemical industry's concerns are made a part of the record in this
proceeding, CMA has petitioned the Commission for leave to intervene.
Conrail Acquisition.
Norfolk Southern presented the federal
government with a revised divestiture plan for the Conrail system.
Following careful analysis of this new plan, CMA reaffirmed its support
for the public offering proposal presented by the Morgan Stanley
investment group.
CMA's support for the public offering, as being the
Page
28
CMA 038632
only existing proposal that would maintain rail competition in the
Northeast region of the country, was conveyed to DOT Secretary Dole and
Congress on December 4, 1985.
amendments to Cargo Tank Specifications.
In response to the
Department of Transportation's proposed new specifications for cargo
tanks, CMA has formed a work group to submit an impact statement.
The
proposed requirements call for significant changes in the manufacture,
operation, maintenance, repair and requalification of all specification
cargo tanks used to transport bulk shipments of chemicals and other
hazardous materials by highway.
Brazil Cargo Reservation.
The United States has agreed with Brazil
to renew for one year their bilateral agreement that condones Brazilian
laws requiring nearly 80 percent of U.S.
exports and imports to be
transported on high-priced Brazilian or U.S.
flag vessels.
Some minor
modifications favoring shippers were made to the bilateral agreement.
Most significantly, the U.S.
told the Brazilians that the anticompetitive
nature of the Brazilian cargo reservation laws must be significantly
liberalized or the agreement will not be renewed again next year.
CMA
staff attended the negotiations as a shipper observer.
CMA will continue
to seek liberalization of the cargo reservation system over the next year.
Emergency Response Training and Equipment.
In an effort to develop
detailed information showing the amount of training and equipment the
chemical industry is making available to emergency responders, the
Distribution Committee is developing a member company questionnaire.
This
information will prove particularly useful in the reauthorization hearings
for the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
Tank Truck Corrosion.
Discussions are continuing with tank truck
operators over the development of an educational program designed to
reduce premature deterioration of tank trucks due to corrosion.
Rates and Compensation
Tank Car Compensation.
The Commission asked the Joint Negotiating
Committee to address three matters with respect to the prescription of a
national tank car mileage allowance system.
These matters were:
the
market sensibility of the proposed system; quantification that the new
formula will reduce the gap in allowances between older and newer cars;
and, a comparison of the allowances paid under the proposed formula, the
1979 formula and the interim formula.
These comments were submitted on
November 4, 1985.
Objection to these comments were expressed by WFIX and
CF Industries.
CMA joined the other car providers and filed a response to
the objections.
CMA is considering supporting the formation of a negotiating group to
represent all the interested car providers.
Page
29
CMA 038633
Litigation and Related Legal Activities
Chemical Parcel Tankers.
CMA recently won a case before an
administrative law judge of the Federal Maritime Commission.
The judge
decided that two carriers in the US/Columbian trade should not be given
antitrust immunity to establish a joint chemical parcel tanker operation.
Assuming the case is not reversed on appeal, it will serve as a strong
precedent that chemical parcel tankers may not collectively set rates or
allocate markets.
CMA, which filed extensive briefs before the
administrative law judge, will file a brief in the appeal in order to
protect the victory.
CMA is also seeking an amendment to the Shipping Act
of 1984 which would prohibit rate setting and market allocation by
chemical parcel tankers.
National Chemical Response and information Center (NCRIC)
All elements of the National Chemical Response and Information Center
were on line by the end of December.
Although much work remains to be
done to insure maximum participation by the membership and use by the
public, the center was completed on schedule.
CHEMTREC
CHEMTREC closed out 1985 with a 17% increase in activity over 1984
levels.
A total of 35,869 calls were handled, of which 7,400 were
emergency related; non-emergency calls totaled 26,619.
Emergency related
calls received averaged 617 per month.
Non-emergency calls received are
in excess of 2,200 per month.
Medical emergencies are showing a slow but steady increase since CMA
officially announced that CHEMTREC would offer assistance to physicians
seeking treatment information.
Referrals to the Chemical Referral Center (CRC) are off to a slow
start since CRC was activated 27 December, but this is expected to
increase significantly as we enter our busy period in early spring.
CHEMNET
The CHEMNET program began operation on November 1, 1985.
At that
time we had a membership of 56.
Since that time we have added another 3
members.
Our current totals are 59 members, of which 35 are participants
and 24 are subscribers.
The participants in the CHEMNET program have designated 121 emergency
response teams to be a part of the system.
The program now includes three
contractors that are available to the membership.
The contractors have 29
Page
30
CMA 038634
teams.
In combination the system has ISO teams that are located in 35
states.
This represents a very significant resource to respond to serious
transportation incidents.
During the months of November and December, we used the CHEMNET system
once.
In that case a contractor, O.H.
Materials, responded to an event
because the shipper could not reach the scene in a reasonable amount of
time.
We expect use of the program to grow as the membership has a better
understanding of the resources it provides.
To expedite that
understanding we have scheduled a workshop on March 12, 1986, in
Washington, D.C., to provide details on the operation to the membership.
Chemical Referral Center
On December 27, 1985, the.Chemical Referral Center (CRC) began
receiving non-emergency health and safety chemical information inquiries
from the public on its "800" toll-free number.
These calls are referred
to the designated contact at the company that manufactures the product in
question.
To date, 118 chemical companies (99 are CMA members) have
provided the CRC with the company contact and product information which
are required for participation in this service.
The Center's chemical
index currently contains profiles on over 20,000 products.
This number
will rapidly increase as participating companies send the CRC the
requested information.
Emergency Response Training
First Responder Training Program.
The videotape training program for
first responders, "First On The Scene", is completed and being
distributed.
The videotape is 31 minutes long and includes a brochure and
discussion guide'.
The following five key points are stressed in the
program:
approach the scene cautiously; identify the hazards; secure the
scene; obtain help in handling the incident; and assure safe site entry.
The objective of the program is to reduce injuries and environmental
damages and to insure that first responders know where to get help in
handling the problem.
There are no restrictions on reproducing the videotape.
copies of the tape or sells them at a cost.
CMA loans
A copy of the training program has been donated to each of the ten
FEMA regions and the National Fire Academy.
Copies are also being
distributed to the State fire and police instructors.
Lending Library.
The lending library of audio-visual training aids
for emergency response personnel has become an extremely successful
Page
31
CMA 038635
program.
Requests to borrow the programs have been received from
emergency response personnel and state agencies from all over the United
States.
10,000 copies of the brochure listing the programs have been
distributed.
Additional copies of some programs purchased were to meet
all requests.
Three new programs have been added to the library.
A new
brochure, being printed, should be available in a few weeks.
Recommended Terms for Personal Protective Equipment.
This technical
bulletin is now available for distribution.
The booklet was developed to
encourage the use of consistent terminology by those who prepare
guidelines for emergency responders and to define these terms for
emergency response personnel.
One of the motivating reasons for preparing the document was the
ambiguous use of commonly used terms such as "Full Protective Clothing”
and "Special Protective Clothing".
Full Protective Clothing could mean
firefighters' bunker gear/turnout gear or encapsulating chemical suits,
depending on who prepared the guidance material.
"Special Protective
Clothing:
could be encapsulating chemical suits or a "splash suit".
Copies of the bulletin have been sent to CMA members urging them to
use these terms when preparing Material Safety Data Sheets or guidance
information for emergency response personnel.
CHEMTREC Workshops.
A CHEMTREC Emergency Response Team Workshop will
be held in Mobile, Alabama on February 25-26, 1986.
This will be the 30th
workshop to be sponsored by CHEMTREC since the first one was presented in
1978.
Nearly 3,700 people from the chemical, carrier and emergency
response communities have received training for on-scene handling of
chemical emergencies through these workshops.
Communications
The Regional Communications Division is producing a leaflet for the
Chemical Referral Center and an overall booklet for NCRIC.
Regional Communications has approved a matching grant to enable the
Ohio Chemical Council to produce a film on first responder training that
will be specific to Ohio.
Media training was provided for member company representatives who
will participate in upcoming media tours on the National Chemical Response
and Information Center.
Energy and Petrochemical Feedstocks
Regulatory Developments and Response
Page
32
CMA 038636
FERC Order No. 436 On Interstate Natural Gas Transportation.
On
October 9, 1985, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issued a
rule on interstate natural gas transportation that adopted many CMA
recommendations.
The rule authorizes self-implementing, nondiscriminatory
interstate transportation services.
Both firm and interruptible services
must be offered by participating interstate pipelines.
Also, reservation
fees for firm services are permitted.
The FERC subsequently modified the rule so that pipelines must permit
distribution company customers to reduce their existing sales demand by up
to 25% per year over five years.
The modified rule (FERC Order 436A) also
permitted certain transportation programs to continue until February 15.
Thus far, most pipelines have been unwilling to transport gas under
the new rules.
The Justice Department is investigating complaints that
pipelines have colluded in refusing to carry gas under those terms.
FERC Proposed Rules on Natural Gas Pricing.
CMA and other industrial
consumers urged the FERC not to implement a proposed block billing
mechanism for interstate pipeline sales.
On December 11, 1985, CMA
testified before the FERC and presented results of an economic impact
study on the proposed block billing rule.
CMA said the cost of the rule
to American industry would be $1.8 billion per year, and the annual cost
to the chemical industry alone would be approximately $600 million.
Both the chemical industry and industry in general, rely
substantially on gas purchased directly from producers.
For example, the
chemical industry purchases 58% of its natural gas from sources other than
conventional pipeline system supply.
The study, done for CMA by Foster
Associates, predicts the proposed pricing rule would raise the price of
gas being purchased directly from producers.
Also, industrial users
buying interstate gas could be allocated higher gas costs.
The FERC proposal also restricts pipeline sales of low-cost gas to
existing customers.
This will increase pressure on both local
distribution companies (LDCs) and end-users to purchase gas directly from
producers, leading to a shift away from conventional pipeline system
supply.
The proposed rule nullifies the potential advantages of increased
competition through the expedited certificate process.
It reduces
pipeline-to-pipeline competition, and encourages bypass of traditional
pipeline system supply sources.
The study also indicates the FERC proposal would increase spot sales,
direct purchases, and traditional pipeline purchases.
It would add
pressure on LDCs and end-users to buy directly from producers since
pipeline competition will be restricted to higher-priced gas.
This will
increase the demand for spot or direct-purchase gas.
Page
33
CMA 038637
In addition, CMA noted that since direct-purchase gas is in
competition with system-supply gas, the marginal cost of system-supply gas
will be higher.
The ceiling on direct-purchase prices will be raised by
as much as 82 cents per million Btu.
Proposed Rules on Old Gas Pricing.
The FERC block billing proposal
fails to deal with the basic problem of continuing price controls that
prevent maximum efficient development and use of the lowest cost "old gas"
resource base, and CMA continues to advocate legislation to deregulate
wellhead ceiling prices, and to remove market restraints.
It appears that
some CMA goals may be achieved through regulatory reform proposals offered
recently by the Department of Energy with the support of the Justice
Department.
On November 18, DOE proposed a rule for final action by the
FERC that makes all old gas eligible for a higher "just and reasonable
price", and that would establish incentive prices for old gas.
On December 20, the FERC issues a schedule for the notice of proposed
rulemaking (Docket RM 86-3).
CMA is preparing written comments that are
due February 25.
A public conference will be announced at a later date.
The FERC is requesting comments on:
legal authority to adopt the
proposal, the inter-relationship with the block billing proposal rule, and
the economic and market impacts of raising old-gas prices.
Taxation
Congressional Developments and Response
President Reagan's last minute intervention provided the margin of
victory as the House passed the Hays and Means tax bill H.R. 3838.
Previously, a majority of 223 Republicans and conservative Democrats had
rejected the Committee's efforts to bring the bill to a vote on the House
Floor.
After the President intervened, the House reversed itself on the
rule of procedure 258 to 168, and passed the bill by voice vote.
Although H.R. 3838 differs significantly from the proposal outlined
by President Reagan on May 28, the bill would nonetheless have a serious
and adverse impact on the chemical industry.
Key features of the
House-passed bill include:
CORPORATE TAX
RATES
DEPRECIATION
o In General
IMPACT ON CHEMICAL
INDUSTRY
36 percent flat rate;
graduated rates for
small businesses
Rate reduction does not offset
loss of capital formation
incentives
New system:
7-year
recovery of chemical
Cost:
$400 million/year
Page
34
CMA 038638
equipment costs; 200
percent declining
balance depreciation
available.
o Recapture
No additional recapture
INVESTMENT TAX
CREDIT
Repeal
Cost;
SI billion/year
MINIMUM TAX
25 percent alternative
tax imposed on tax
preferences in excess
of regular tax liability
Cost:
$600 million/year
Extend R&D tax credit
at 20 percent; restrict
qualifying R&D expenses
as under H.R. 1188
Value;
$200 million/year
(down from $300 million/year)
o Allocation of
R&D Expenses to
Foreign Source
Income
No provision.
Statutory moratorium of
Treasury allocation
Rules expired 12-31-85
Cost;
o Foreign
Tax Credit
Retain overall limita­
tion on foreign tax
credit with separate
limitations for passive,
financial and shipping
income; impose compar­
ability rules for pay­
ments in-lieu-of taxes.
Cost:
less restrictivethan President1s proposal,
but decreases utility of
foreign tax credit substan­
tially to prevent double
taxation.
o Source Rules
for Sales of
Property
Substitute "Substance
of Sale" for "Title
Passage" test
Cost: would have serious
and unpredictable impact,
especially unsettling
consequences in the tax
treatment of U.S. exports.
o Allocation of
Interest
Expenses
Require allocation of
all expenses among all
members of affiliated
group
Cost:
for corporations
with significant foreign
operations, proposal
would significantly reduce
current deduction of expenses
against U.S. income
RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT
EXPENSES
o 25 Percent
R&D Tax Credit
$300 million/year
Page
35
CMA 038639
o Section 936
Possessions
Credit
Retain Sec. 936 credit,
tighten active trade or
business trust and costsharing payment rules.
Cost:
restrictions on use
of Sec. 936 Credit could
render manufacturing operations marginal in Puerto
Rico
It should be noted that House passage of the tax bill was attained
after President Reagan had furnished a letter to Congressman Kemp (R-NY)
in which he promised to veto "unacceptable" tax legislation that does not
increase the individual personal exemption to $2000, provide for business
capital formation, and assure a tax rate structure no higher than the
Administration's original proposal.
Each would significantly increase the
bill's revenue cost and would require substantial additional offsetting
revenue provisions.
Senator Bob Packwood (R-OR) has indicated that the Senate Finance
Committee will begin its review of H.R. 3838 in early February.
Moreover, Senator Packwood has expressed concern over the ability to find
new revenue sources to'offset proposed Administration changes in the
House-passed bill.
Thus, the prospects are doubtful that the Finance
Committee will develop an early alternative to the House bill before the
July 4th Congressional recess.
CMA strongly opposes the provisions of H.R. 3838 that would
substantially increase business tax costs, particularly of capital
intensive industries and of those that engage in significant international
trade.
A number of leading trade organizations have joined in opposition
to these provisions.
CMA has developed an on-going tax legislative work
plan and is coordinating its activities with allied business groups.
Plant Management and Design (Engineering Codes and Standards)
Regulations, Standards, Codes and Technology
Forum on Safety and Reliability Improvement.
The Inspection and
Engineering Advisory Committee's Maintenance Task Group will meet late
January to make further preparations for the CMA forum on safety and
reliability improvement through application of advanced inspection and
maintenance techniques.
This forum will emphasize those techniques that
directly influence safety of plant and community.
Forum on Process Computers.
The EAC Process Control Task Group met
December 11 to refine the program and arrangements for the Fifth CMA*
Process Computer Users Forum to be held May 5-7, 1986.
This forum will
emphasize safety aspects of control systems design and operation.
Codes.
CMA representatives attended the December 1985 National
Electrical Code panel meetings to discuss and vote on actions taken during
Page
36
CMA 038640
the January 1985 panel meetings.
CMA submitted 114 proposals for revision
of the 1984 code during the fall of 1984, and submitted 68 comments during
the public review period.
The Electrical Codes and Standards Task Group
will meet in Atlanta next May to prepare for floor action on the 1987 code
before its adoption at the NFPA Annaul Meeting.
Safety and costs are the
issues involved.
Standards.
The committee prepared CMA positions on 17 API, IEEE,
NEMA, NFPA, and UL standards proposed for adoption as American National
Standards.
These standards cover storage tanks, test procedures,
electrical equipment in hazardous atmospheres, motors, generators,
insulation, conduit, and controls.
As with codes, safety and costs are
the issues involved.
International Trade/International Competitiveness
Congressional Developments and Response
Omnibus Trade Bill.
The last Congress passed the Trade and Tariff Act
of 1984 in October 1984.
Although this act was the first omnibus trade
bill to be passed in five years, it addressed mostly non-controversial
issues of international trade.
Since the passage of the law, the already
large U.S. foreign trade deficit has swelled to record levels and
probably reached 9140 billion in 1985.
The current Congress is making a
concerted effort to address the nation's growing foreign trade problem and
action on a new piece of omnibus trade legislation can be expected early
in the session.
Senator Danforth (R-MO) introduced the Trade Enhancement Act (S.
The bill contains multiple titles which among other topics, deals
'with foreign targeting, changes to trade remedy laws, the protection of
intellectual property rights and authorization for a new round of
multi-lateral trade negotiations.
CMA already has an approved position on
intellectual property rights and the CMA Board is being asked to address
tariff cutting in the MTN at its January 27-28 meeting.
On the House side, the issue of tax reform prevented the House Ways
and Means Committee from addressing the trade issue during the first
session.
It is expected that trade will be one of its top priority issues
for the second session.
Rep. Dan Rostenkowski (D-8-IL) has already sent
a confidential memorandum to all committee members calling for a retreat
early in 1986 to deal with international trade issues.
Such a retreat
was used last fall by the chairman to get the ways and Means Committee
started on its tax reform package.
The House Energy and Commerce
Committee, chaired by Representative John Dingell (D-16-MI), continues to
push for jurisdiction on trade matters and the committee has already
proposed a limited scope trade package.
Page
37
CMA 038641
CMA's International Trade Committee is currently preparing to address
trade legislation in both houses as it develops.
Wherever possible this
will be done through the OCITA coalition.
International Negotiations/Agreements
Multi-lateral Trade Negotiation
Last January in his State of the
Union Address, President Reagan called for authority to enter into
discussions leading toward a new round of Multi-lateral Trade Negotiations
A request for such authority is provided in Senator Danforth's
The House will consider the same granting of bargaining authority
early in the year.
The CMA International Trade Committee is recommending
that the Board adopt a position on the MTN at its January 27-28 meeting.
The recommended CMA policy consists of a statement of principles to be
considered by the U.S.
negotiators participating in an MTN.
The proposed
position states that an MTN should focus on the issues of foreign market
access, investment, and dispute settlement procedures for violation of
international trading rules.
Chemical tariff cutting: should be done on a
selective basis with import sensitive products exempted where justified.
Policy Development and Economic Analysis
U.S./Canada Bilateral Free Trade Agreement.
The Trade and Tariff
Act (TTA) of 1984 authorizes the President, upon proper notice to the
Congress, to enter into discussions with other countries which could lead
to a bilateral trade agreement.
Much preliminary work has been done over
the last few years both in the United States and Canada in preparation for
such an agreement.
This includes discussions between CMA's International
Trade Committee and the Canadian Chemical Producers Association Trade
Committee as well as studies by appropriate agencies of both countries'
governments.
On December 10, 1985, President Reagan formally notified the Congress
of his intent to enter into negotiations with the Canadian government.
His action came as a result of a request from the Canadian government for
such negotiations which is one of the requirements stipulated by the TTA.
CMA's membership has been informed of all opportunities for input
into the government's hearings and studies on this issue which have
already been conducted.
Also, the CMA Board has approved a position on a
U.S./Canada agreement which has been well received by officials at the
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative and the Department of Commerce.
Developments will be monitored closely and further action taken as
appropriate.
Communications
Page
38
CMA 038642
The annual Economic Briefing for busin ess reporters focussed on the
impact of international competition on the industry's ability to pass of
the high cost of domestic environmental costs.
Twenty reporters attended
the briefing.
International Regulatory Issues
(Health, Safety and Environment)
International Organizations
ILO Meeting on Industrial Hazards.
On October 15-21, 1985, the
International Affairs Group (IAG) participated in the International Labour
Organization (ILO) "Tripartite Ad Hoc Meeting of Special Consultants on
Methods of Prevention of Major Hazards in Industry." This meeting was held
in Geneva, Switzerland.
The purpose of the meeting was to develop the necessary steps to
improve safety and health in the production and storage of dangerous
substances and to develop guidelines or an international convention
onmajor industrial hazard control and emergency response systems.
European pressure for international adoption of the "Seveso Directive" on
this subject was deflected by U.S.
and Third World participants.
The
meeting did not result in the compilation or adoption of international
guidelines.
However, continued vigilance is necessary to ensure that ILO
follow-upactions do not unduly restrict the foreign operations of the U.S.
chemical industry.
UNCTC/UNEP Seminar on Industrial Process Safety and Hazards.
After
considerable debate, the IAG decided not to participate in the joint U.N.
Centre on Transnational Corporations (UNCTC) and U.N.
Environment
Programme (UNEP) December, 1985, Seminar on Environmental Management of
Industrial Process Safety and Hazards.
We believed that little progress
would be made at the Seminar because of the wide range of complicated
technical, legal, and policy issues raised in the Agenda and Overview
Papers and the anti-industry biases reflected in these documents.
IAG
also objected to the strictly chemical industry focus of the Seminar and
expressed concern about duplication of efforts with other international
organizations.
IAG will, however, follow the post-Seminar developments at
UNCTC/UNEP for their possible impact on the chemical industry.
Subsequent
to our declining to participate, the U.S.
Government, the International
Chamber of Commerce (ICC), and the European Council of Chemical
Manufacturers' Federations (CEFIC) also refused to attend.
OECD Developments.
In November, 1985, IAG submitted comments to EPA
and the State Department on new developments in the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) ChemicalsProgramme and on
papers to be considered at Meetings of the OECD Environment Committee and
Chemicals Group/Management Committee.
IAG also commented on proposed
Page
CMA 038643
agenda items for the upcoming OECD High-Level (Environmental Minister
Meeting), anticipated to be held in late 1986or early 1987.
Lee Thomas,
EPA Administrator, is expected to attend.
In addition to the examination of the adequacy of
existing chemicals, the OECD plans to examine the need
animal testing at this meeting.
The IAG has formed an
examine the animal testing question, which will report
to IAG sometime in the Spring of 1986.
available data on
for restrictions on
Ad Hoc Group to
its recommendations
International Regulations
Consolidated List of Chemicals.
On December 5, 1985, IAG
submitted comments to the State Department on a June, 1985, Paper of the
Secretariat concerning the compilation of the U.N.
"Consolidated
List of Products Whose Consumption And/Or Sale Have Been Banned,
Withdrawn, Severely Restricted or Not Approved by Governments".
IAG
reaffirmed earlier comments in opposition to this U.N.
activity.
However, underunder the assumption that the U.N.
will continue to compile
its List, IAG also recommended changes in the criteria for listing
chemicals andon provisions to ensure against inadvertent disclosure of
confidentialinformation obtained by the U.N.
in conjunction with its
activity.
Legal Support
EC Product Liability Directive.
With the support of Counsel, IAG is
preparing a proposed position paper on the European Cononunity1s(EC) July,
1985, Product Liability Directive.
This Directive includes several
concepts of concern to international business, including those of
developmental risk, financial limitations on liability, strict liability,
and the definition of a defect.
The member countries of the EC have three years in which to implement
the Directive.
However, the direction of this implementation process is
unclear, since governments have been given various optionsby the Directive
on critical aspects such as financial ceilings and developmental risk,
it
is, therefore, to be expected that differing, inconsistent implementing
laws will be adopted by the EC member countries.
This will inevitably
lead to forum shopping by future plaintiffs.
IAG's comments will be coordinated with those of the International
Chamber of Commerce and the European Council of Chemical Manufacturers'
Federations.
Patents and Protection of Technology
Congress
Page
CMA 038644
Process Patent Legislation.
On December 16, 1985, CMA sent a letter
to the Senate Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on Patents, Copyrights and •
Trademarks expressing support for S.1543, the major legislative vehicle on
process patents.
The Subcommittee had held a hearing on this legislation
on October 23, 1985.
S.1543 would give the owner of a process patented in the United States
the right to bring a suit for patent infringement against a party who
imports a product that is manufactured abroad by using the process.
Many
countries that are major trading partners of the United States already
have such laws.
CMA's comments, however, also urge the Subcommittee to address
ancillary issues before acting on S.1543:
the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) implications of this legislation and circumstances under
which a presumption of infringement should arise when the patent owner is
unable to obtain information about the process used to manufacture a
product.
Earlier in 1985, CMA had joined in a coalition with 73 companies and
12 associations in supporting legislation on this subject generally.
This
coalition is led by Intellectual Property Owners, Inc. (IPO).
The Uniform Patent Procedures Act of 1985.
On November 25, 1985, CMA
endorsed S.64, the Uniform Patent Procedures Act of 1985.
This
legislation, introduced by Senator Dole (R.Kan.) on January 3, 1985,
focuses on government patent policy.
It allows all government contractors
to elect to retain title to federally funded inventions.
It expands
existing law, which applies to contractors from small businesses and
nonprofit organizations, to include large business contractors as well.
CMA believes that S.64 is important to eliminate barriers to
industry's development and application of new technology, and to encourage
a climate under which such development and application will be fostered.
Moreover, prompt passage of S.64 would create an atmosphere in which all
industry, not just selected sectors, would be given the necessary
incentives to make necessary financial investments to move new ideas into
the marketplace.
Policy Development/Legal Issues
Section 301 Investigation on Korea.
In November, 1985, the Office of
the U.S, Trade Representative (USTR) initiated an investigation under
Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended, into the adequacy of the
laws of the Republic of Korea governing the protection of intellectual
property rights.
Page
41
CMA 038645
r
CMA submitted preliminary comments on this subject to USTR.
Additional comments are being compiled, especially on those aspects of the
Korean law that are most troublesome and specific examples of instances in
which U.S. trade and investment have been negatively affected.
State Legislative and Regulatory Advocacy
Superfund
In 1986 additional state superfund action is expected in
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Washington, California and South Carolina.
In
New Jersey alone the cost to industry could approach one billion dollars
as Senator Ray Lesniak works to expand the fund.
CMA State Hazardous
Wastes/Groundwater Task Group members are working with the appropriate
state trade organizations on this critical issue.
The Task Group is also completing the first phase of their study of
state superfunds which consisted of a survey of 8 key states:
Alabama,
California, Illinois, Louisiana, Michigan, New Jersey, New York, and South
Carolina.
This initial study will result in a better understanding of the
potential cost to the chemical industry and will also lead to an expanded
study to obtain more comprehensive information.
The study addresses the
broad range of state superfunds, industry funding bases, amounts
collected, actual uses of funds, site selection criteria, cleanup
standards and future plans.
i
Public Compensation
Major state activity on public compensation continues to be in the
state of Massachusetts where the Special Legislative Commission on
Liability for Releases of Oil and Hazardous Materials has been
reactivated.
The coimnission will be studying insurance availability,
quantification of need and liability issues.
The state's public
compensation bill was not acted upon in 1985, but it has been refiled for
1986.
Hazardous Waste Management and Regulation
The National Conference of State Legislatures has identified
environmental issues as one of the top three issues facing the states in
1986.
The other two are education and fiscal concerns.
The major
environmental issues are:
groundwater, acid rain and the disposal of
hazardous waste.
f
The siting of hazardous waste facilities, always a major concern, has
become more complicated by the growing liability insurance problem.
Most
sites cannot be licensed without insurance, which is virtually
unavailable.
Page
42
CMA 038646
Some of the action around the states includes California where the
Governor's task force on toxics, waste, and technology will report its
proposed solutions to the states hazardous waste capacity and policy
problems on May 1.
These recommendations will then be considered by the
legislature as the basis for new laws.
Ohio legislators have approved
sharp increases in waste disposal fees ranging up to S20 per ton.
The
same Ohio bill provides funds to local municipalities for equipment and
training for local emergencies involving hazardous waste.
Right-to-Know
Legislation - Following more than a year of intense debate, the
Michigan Legislature reached a compromise on a package of legislation
which has been endorsed by the Michigan Chemical Council.
The package
consists of three bills:
H.B. 4111 addresses worker right-to-know and
adopts the federal OSHA Hazard Communications Standard with expanded
coverage; H.B. 5250 requires emergency response planning through
information sharing with fire chiefs? H.B. 5251 sets community
right-to-know provisions allowing the general public access to MSDS's and
workplace lists of hazardous substances.
The Legislature adjourned the
1985 session without taking final action on these bills, which will carry
over to 1986.
Consideration is expected early in the year.
In Hew Jersey, the Legislature gave final approval to A. 4145, the
"Toxic Catastrophe Prevention Act." This bill requires manufacturers and
users of a limited list of chemicals to register with the state and
perform risk assessments of their chemical processes.
The state has the
authority to order risk reduction measures for covered facilities and
could order operations to cease until risks are reduced to an acceptable
The bill is expected to be signed into law by the Governor in the
near future.
Litigation - on December 12, 1985, the U.S. District Court in
Pennsylvania ruled on the relationship between the state's right-to-know
law and the federal OSHA Hazard Communications Standard.
The ruling
followed the precedent set in New Jersey and held that the Pennsylvania
law is preempted by the standard as it applies to the regulation of
employee health and safety in the manufacturing sector.
The ruling also
held that parts of the law applicable to nonmanufacturers are still
operative, thus creating a dual system in the state.
The chemical
industry may seek clarification on some aspects of the ruling.
The Ohio Manufactures Association has filed suit in Federal Court to
overturn the city of Akron's local right-to-know ordinance on the grounds
of federal preemption.
Arguments and filings in that case are expected to
continue through January.
1986 Legislative Sessions - The State Affairs Right-to-Know Tasi:
Page
43
CMA 038647
Group is developing a list of issues which may become state legislative
initiatives in 1986,
These include:
collecting data on chemical
production and use in a state; mandatory chemical process controls;
mandatory emergency response planning; and regulation of chemical
shipments through communities.
The task group is reviewing CMA policy in
these areas and preparing position papers and other support materials for
use by member companies and state CIC's who may face these issues during
the year.
Groundwater
As mentioned earlier, the National Conference of State Legislatures
(NCSL) identified groundwater contamination as one of the three top
environmental issues of 1986.
CMA's State Hazardous Waste/Groundwater
Task Group'reports that groundwater will be an issue in virtually every
state.
NCSL and the Council of State Governments are developing position
papers and model legislation, and CMA State Affairs is assisting these key
organizations.
Part of this effort will be shared with a new CMA work
group which combines State Affairs representatives with their counterparts
from the technical committees.
All of this activity is primarily a result
EPA delegating most of the groundwater program to the states
combined with the likelihood of the U.S.
Congress not developing related
legislation until 1988.
So most of the groundwater action for at least
the next couple of years will be at the state level.
Hazardous Materials Transportation
A bill has been recommended to the Colorado Legislature that would
require most trucks carrying hazardous materials to get permits and follow
designated routes.
Money from permit sales and fines imposed on violators
would be used to create a hazardous materials safety fund for training
emergency response crews.
The State Department of Public Safety would
determine the routes that hazardous materials trucks could take and would
issue other rules.
While the majority of the states have passed Good Samaritan laws,
some states will be considering the issue in 1986.
The New Jersey
proposal died near the end of 1985, but the New Jersey Chemical Industry
Council has succeeded in having an identical bill introduced this year.
Additional support is needed to assure passage.
The Ohio House passed a
Good Sam bill on the last day of 1985 and the Senate will consider the
issue early in 1986.
Toxic Air
State Regulation - The Connecticut Department of Health has
challenged a major new air toxics control program that was recently
Page
44
CMA 038648
announced by the state's Department of Environmental Control.
The program
would set ambient limits based on TLV's plus a safety factor for 850
chemicals.
The Department of Health is pushing for changes in the program
to take into account actual health effects of the chemicals.
Until the
agencies are able to reach an agreement, the air toxics program approval
process has been put on hold.
Other states which are considering air
toxics control regulations include Maryland, Kentucky, and North Carolina.
Policy Development - The State Affairs Committee is actively
participating in CMA's effort to develop a new Association program for
reducing toxic chemical emissions.
Once the program has been approved,
the committee will assist other CMA departments in disseminating the
program to state interest groups,
Chronic Health
Legislation establishing a new system for identifying and protecting
workers who are deemed to be at "high" risk of contracting occupational
disease is being considered in California.
A.B. 990 is strongly opposed
by the chemical industry because of its burdensome requirements and high
costs.
The industry feels that existing programs in the state already
accomplish the goals of this bill, and new legislation is unnecessary.
The California CIC, along with CMA member companies, is attempting to
amend or defeat this legislation.
10. Insurance/Liability
Almost all of the state legislative bodies are working on some aspect
of this issue.
The most pressing concern is the affordability and
availability of insurance coverage.
Hearings have been scheduled in many
states.
The more basic concerns of tort reform are also being reviewed.
These concerns will take longer to resolve.
They are being worked on by
the National Council of State Legislatures and the American Legislative
Exchange Council among others.
Specific Chemical Research and Advocacy
Research and Advocacy Highlights
Alkanolamines.
The National Toxicology Program will begin, this
February, a 90-day subchronic bioassay on triethanolamine.
The Panel will
actively track this study.
Benzene.
OSHA's proposed revision of the benzene workplace standard
was published in the Federal Register on December 10, 1985.
OSHA is
proposing to reduce the PEL from 10 ppm to 1 ppm TWA with an action level
Comments are due to OSHA on February 14, 1986, and hearings
are scheduled in March.
Page
45
CMA 038649
The Benzene Panel is considering health and risk assessment aspects
of the proposal, expected variability in monitoring for compliance with a
PEL of 1 ppm, feasibility issues, medical surveillance, use of respirators
and other industrial hygiene issues.
Butadiene.
The Panel filed comments on the risk assessment for
butadiene prepared by EPA's Carcinogen Assessment Group (CAG).
Panel
representative made a presentation on the CAG risk assessment to EPA's
Science Advisory Board (SAB).
The SAB agreed with many of the Panel's
criticisms of the CAG risk assessment aiid recommended several revisions
along lines suggested by the Panel.
Th$ Panel also filed comments on a
risk assessment prepared by the EPA Office of Toxic Substances (OTS) to
support conclusions about occupational exposure to butadiene.
Panel
representatives subsequently met with John Moore, Assistant Administrator
for Pesticides and Toxic Substances, to discuss the risk assessment.
Moore agreed with many of the Panel's concerns.
The Panel's comments will
be provided to OSHA to assist in preparing a risk assessment for
occupational exposure tb butadiene.
The OTS risk assessment is the basis for EPA* s TSCA Section 9(a)
referral to OSHA.
Panel representatives met with the OSHA staff and JACA
Corporation, OSHA's contractor, to discuss the evaluation of butadiene in
response to EPA's referral.
The Panel will track this activity at OSHA.
The Panel also contracted with an expert consultant to review the
mathematical calculations included in the OTS risk assessment on
butadiene.
The consultant's report identified several flaws in EPA's
approach and recomnended alternative procedures.
The report has been
submitted to EPA.
Panel representatives participated in a CMA workshop on
risk assessment and made presentations on the EPA risk assessment on
butadiene.
The Panel sponsored an audit of the mouse study on butadiene
conducted by the National Toxicology Program.
The Panel's audit
documented the quality control problems experienced during the NTP study
and reinforced the Panel's position that the study is unsuitable for use
in quantitative risk modeling.
Panel representatives also met with NTP
and CUT to review ongoing testing programs for butadiene.
In October 1985, EPA published in the Federal Register an "Intent to
List" Butadiene as a Hazardous Air Pollutant under Section 112 of the
Clean Air Act.
Panel representatives met with the staff of EPA's Office
of Air Quality Planning and Standards to review EPA's evaluation of
butadiene for possible regulation.
The Panel is assisting EPA in trying
to realistically determine the emissions of butadiene.
The Panel activities with EPA and OSHA are expected to continue at a
high level in 1986.
Page
46
CMA 038660
Cumene.
EPA announced proposed testing requirements for cumene under
Section 4 of TSCA in a Federal Register notice on November 6, 1985.
Manufacturers and processors of the chemical will be required to conduct
tests for health and environmental effects.
Health effects testing will include:
pharmacokinetics, developmental
toxicity, subchronic toxicity, neurotoxicity, oncogenicity and
reproductive toxicity (if triggered).
To test for environmental effect,
the Agency is proposing acute and chronic aquatic toxicity tests on
saltwater fish and invertebrates, and biodegradation and volatilization
from water.
The Cumene Panel is preparing comments on the proposal.
Of
particular interest are the findings upon which EPA bases the proposed
rule:
a potentially unreasonable risk of mutagenic and oncogenic effects;
and, a potential for substantial human exposure from manufacturing,
processing, use and disposal.
The Panel wi}.l sponsor further mutagenicity
testing to determine if there is sufficient evidence for the first finding
and also is closely examining emissions data to see if there is
justification for the second,
comments are due to EPA by February 20,
1986.
Butylated Hydroxytoluene.
The Department of Public Health, State of
Massachusetts, has tentatively decided to delist BHT as a carcinogen from
its Substance List.
This occurred mainly through the efforts of Dr.
Don
McGraw of Koppers Company, the BHT Panel Chairman.
In addition, Irwin
Prager of Uniroyal testified at the Department's Public Hearing bn behalf
of the Panel.
The Department is expected to publish the revised Substance
List reflecting this change in January 1986.
Cresols.
The Panel is expecting the final TSCA Section 4 test rule
this March.
In preparation for the rule, the Panel is receiving bids to
perform the toxicology testing.
A final contractor will be selected and
testing will begin once the final rule is issued.
The Panel is also
tracking the EPA Land Disposal Prohibition Regulation.
Cresols are on
the initial list for possible land disposal banning.
Dibenzofurans/Dibenzodioxins.
The Panel is preparing comments in
response to EPA's TSCA Section 4 and 8 proposed rules.
The proposal
requires the conduct of dioxin and dibenzofgran analyses of various
chemical substances.
The Panel filed comments in response to EPA* s RCRA proposal to change
the listing from "acute hazardous" to "toxi4" for incineration residues of
several dioxin wastes.
The comments argued that EPA should raise the
concentration limit for wastes covered by the rule from 10 ppm to 100 ppm.
Ethylene Dibromide.
The Panel is waiting for a long-overdue OSHA
Page
47
CMA 038651
final rule.
The Panel will review the rule once it is published.
Ethylene Dichloride.
The EPA announced last October an "Intent to
List" EDC as a Hazardous Air Pollutant under Section 112 of the Clean Air
Act.
The Panel provided comments on the announcement and is further
evaluating several of the references given in the announcement.
The Panel
will further review the health effects and risk assessment on EDC provided
in the announcement.
Ethylene Oxide.
The Ethylene Oxide Industry Council provided
comments to EPA on its recent "Intent to List" EO as a Potential Hazardous
Air Pollutant.
The EOIC Environmental Task Group is evaluating the EO air
emissions developed by EPA.
The group is providing EPA with information
to realistically estimate EO releases.
The Task Group has also reviewed
the EPA Human Exposure Model which is used in the Agency's Hazardous Air
Pollutant program.
EPA is presently surveying the industry to determine
episodic releases or excursions from the annual average.
Ethylhexanoic Acid.
The Ethylhexaiioic Acid Panel met with EPA to
discuss the proposed test rule for EHA under Section 4 of TSCA (50 Fed.
Reg.
20678).
EPA has speculated that dermal exposure to EHA might occur
during processing, although manufacturers and major processors have
indicated to the Agency that most operations occur under conditions where
exposure is unlikely.
To bolster its no-exposure argument, the Panel
contracted with Temple, Barker and Sloane, Inc.
to conduct a survey of
handling practices among processors of EHA.
The survey responses
indicated that dermal contact with EHA during processing is virtually
non-existent.
Ninety percent of the responders instruct their employees
to wear gloves when they may have contact with EHA, and five percent
distribute EHA without repackaging.
Given these results, the Panel feels
that EPA cannot justify a finding that exposure to EHA in the workplace
"may present an unreasonable risk of injury."
The Panel will continue to work with EPA to document the position
that a No-Test Decision should be made for EHA.
EPA is expected to
publish its conclusion in the Summer of 1986.
Fluorocarbons.
In October 1985 the Fluorocarbon Panel released its
report on the production, use, and emissions of chlorofluorocarbons 11 and
12 through 1984.
Production of CFC-11 increased from 1,427 million pounds
in 1983 to 1,531 million pounds in 1984, according to the Alexander Grant
and Company compilation.
Members of the Panel met in early October with Department of State
and Environmental Protection Agency officials to review upcoming
activities under the United Nations Environment Programme's (UNEP)
Committee for the Protection of Stratospheric Ozone.
Two economic
workshops are being planned for 1986, as well as an EPA/UNEP conference
Page
48
CMA 038652
entitled, "Health and Environmental Effects of Ozone Depletion and Climate
Change."
The Panel submitted comments to EPA on the August 1985 draft of the
Rand Corporation report on "Projected Use, Emissions, and Banks of
Potential Ozone-Depleting Substances" (October 16, 1985).
Retirements and reassignments marked the closing months of 1985.
In
September, long-time Panel member B.
Peter Block of Pennwalt retired.
He
has been replaced both on the Panel and as Chairman of the External
Affairs Task Force by Julius Dohany, Director of Fluorochemicals Research
and Development for Pennwalt.
Hillel Magid of Allied-Signal and Odo Klais
of Hoechst Ag were both reassigned to new duties within their companies in
December.
No plans to replace them have been announced.
Also in
December, Richard B.
ward, representative from E.I.
du Pont and Chairman
of the Panel, was transferred to a new position at DuPont.
Mack McFarland
will replace him as the DuPont representative.
The Panel is facing the
election of a new chairman.
Glycol Ethers.
At an October public course-setting meeting, EPA
announced its intent to require testing of three triethylene glycol
monoethers (TGE) — methyl, ethyl and butyl.
EPA is proceeding with a
single-phase rulemaking.
